--- Page 1 ---
Guidelines for Internship/Research Internship for
Under Graduate Students
am-fasim fryara
University Grants Commission
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
New Delhi- 110002
(2023)
--- Page 2 ---
CONTENTS
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
Introduction
Objectives
Internship Categories
3.1. Enhancing Employability
3.2 Developing Research Aptitude
Internship Structure
Academic Credentials & Monitoring of Internship
5.1 Competencies to be Developed During Research Internships
5.2 Duration and Slots for Internship in Curriculum
Role of Internship Providing Organisation, Nodal Officer,
Internship Supervisor and Mentor
6.1 Role of Internship Providing Organisation
6.2 Role of Nodal Officer
6.3 Role of Internship Supervisor
6.4 Role of Mentor
Internship Mechanism
Evaluation
Miscellaneous
--- Page 3 ---
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The India Skill Report (ISR), 2022 highlights that youth employability has improved to
46.2 % in 2021 from 45.97% till 2020. Interestingly, 51.44% employability of females
was observed compared to 45.97% of males for 2021-22. In the year 2023, undergraduates
in domain of the commerce got the highest employability rating at about 60.62%. The
reports further mentioned that, 88.6% of graduates are looking for internship
opportunities. In 2022, 88.42% of respondents in the report have given preference to an
internship for gaining experience. It was also recorded that the year 2022 was also the
year to mark the highest demand for internships since 2016. It is also observed that in India
employers like to hire employees having at least a year of working experience (ISR, 2022).
In India, there are many platforms (Internshala, Lets Intern, Killer Launch, Hello Intern)
that offer internships from many renowned organizations. In addition to this, many other
portals are available which provide trainings and a range of courses across Industries.
Experts also enroll in internships to get life-changing experiences. Internshala launched an
initiative called the “Grand Summer Internship Fair’, which offers more than 23000
internship opportunities to people from all educational backgrounds. The internship model
proactively works as the primary value for providing the familiarity of genuine work in a
representative situation to the students by the mentor under closedsupervision. The pupil
gain experience ina tested pedagogical norm and is expected to make critical thinking with
a range of values and observations.
The National Education Policy 2020-(NEP-2020) views that the purpose of the education
system is to develop good human beings capable of rational thought and action, possessing
compassion and empathy, courage and resilience, scientific temper and creative
imagination, with sound ethical moorings and values. It aims at producing engaged,
productive, and contributing citizens for building an equitable, inclusive, and plural society
as envisaged by our Constitution. The NEP-2020 envisions promoting quality research in
higher education and to ensure quality education by higher education institutions (HEIs),
research and innovation are two inherently important aspects. The societal needs of our
country can only be addressed by having a strong knowledge, skills, value and research-
oriented vibrant higher education ecosystem for sustainable development.
In accordance with the NEP-2020, the UGC framed a new student-centric “Curriculum and
Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programmes” (CCFUP) incorporating a flexible
choice-based credit system, multiple entry and exit options, and a multidisciplinary
approach. In an internship course students require to participate in a work experience or
professional activity, or cooperative education activity with an entity external to the
education institution, under the supervision of an expert from the given external entity.
A prime aspect of the internship/research internship is induction into actual work
situations. Internships includes working with government or private organizations, higher
education institutions, universities, research and development labs/research
organisations/non-government organisations, enterprises, centres involved in research,
innovativeness and entrepreneurship, business organizations, local industry, artists,
--- Page 4 ---
craftspeople, and similar other entities for providing opportunities to students for active
engagement in on-site experiential learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES
An internship is gaining first-hand experience by an individual besides comprehending
the way of working in an organisation, leading to improve the skill aptitude for a specific
job or job role and building research capabilities with learning opportunities. Internships
should be such organized that benefits the research intern as well as the internship
providing organization. Following are the intended objectives of engaging undergraduate
students in internship for employability and research internship programmes:
1. Integration of workshop with workplace: To see the internship in a broader,
integrated and holistic manner where the delivery of the classroom is aligned with
outcomes of the workplace. The objectives of the internship need to be designed
with the intention of integrating workshop / classroom / lab/research lab learnings
with the workplace (organisation / enterprise / start-ups / corporate / farmlands
/ artisans / gig workers / Non-government organisations (NGOs)/research &
development organisations, higher education institutions (HEIs), etc).
2. Understanding of the world of work: To provide undergraduate students with
an opportunity to improve their understanding of the experiences, challenges, and
opportunities of the real world of work, as well as to set their expectations and
behaviour in accordance with the demands, culture, and values of current and
emerging jobs.
3. Hybrid model learning: To broaden learning opportunities by combining
physical and digital modes of learning while working in industry, corporate,
research & development organisations, workplace, within or outside HEIs,
blended with a mentor or research expert and as per the need and convenience.
4. Developing research aptitude: To create and facilitate conditions that allow
students in their quest for knowledge, its discovery, learn, understand and sharpen
research acumen, familiarising with analytical tools and techniques with
appropriate usage, research methodologies, data analysis, integrity and ethical
behaviour, manuscripts preparations, identification of appropriate journals,
patent and intellectual property rights, and their application in solving
research/complex/real-life problems.
5. Exposure in emerging technologies: To provide exposure to emerging
technologies/ automation and how it can support, facilitate, improve and reinforce
work processes/ culture/ job roles/art and craft, including thetraditional areas of
art-craft/ heritage skills, agriculture, etc.
6. Enhance entrepreneurial capabilities: Understand how organisations /
enterprises are formed for sustainable progress so that start-ups and
entrepreneurial capabilities are strengthened among students and they are
encouraged to be job creators.
7. Development of decision-making and teamwork skills: To facilitate the
development of problem-solving and decision-making skills, enable teamwork &
--- Page 5 ---
collaboration culture to promote research, academic and _ professional
developments.
8. Cultivate a sense of Social Imagery and Citizenship Responsibility: To develop
a sense of social imagery (issues) and philanthropic versatility among the
graduating students that will facilitate towards the development of an attitude
towards citizenship responsibility.
9. Stimulate collaborative influence: To promote HEIs collaboration, industry-
academia partnership will be developed to provide collaborative internships,
apprenticeships, and research opportunities to the students in the predefined
areas of importance which will lead institutions, universities, organisations,
academicians, and students to collaborate on how to learn with one another.
10. Enhancing professional competency: The internship should not only focus on
employability or research capabilities; there is also a need for professional
principles, ethics, values, and integrity which will enable them to gain perspective,
practice, develop as competency and perform professional tasks in the way that
the employment market demands.
3.0 INTERNSHIP CATEGORIES
The employability of graduates can be improved by developing practical experience and
exposure with the required right kind of attitude for the workplace. The internship is one
of the important apparatuses that help in improving these employability skills and can
help in generating competency, capability, professional working skills, expertise, and
confidence among the students for employability and developing interest/passion for
research. The interns can understand the application of theory in the workplace.
The undergraduate internships would be classified into two types:
i. Internship for enhancing the employability
ii. Internship for developing the research aptitude
3.1 Enhancing Employability
Graduates face many difficulties after graduation to enrol in the workforce. Recent
graduates are lacking knowledge, practical skills, and experience which are mandatory
requirements demanded by employers for recruitment. Graduates face many difficulties
after graduation to enrol in the workforce. Recent graduates are lacking knowledge,
practical skills, and experience which are mandatory requirements demanded by
employers for recruitment.
Employability refers to the certain attributes of an individual that enable him/her to
perform any job opportunity in line with the set standards of performance to meet
expectations for the expected job. Employability is a set of skills and attributes developed
through a range of experiences at workshops and workplaces. It states that when a
student can demonstrate skills on the job. Individuals need to develop such competencies
which reduce the obstacles as job seekers and also increase their potential as job
providers.
--- Page 6 ---
The internship programs should be well conceptualized and interactive for building
research capabilities/aptitude/skills of our under-graduates/researchers/faculties for
Development of project and its execution
Decision-making
Confidence development
Working/coordinating in a team
Creative and critical thinking and problem-solving
Ethical values
Professional development
Understand government/local bodies world of work
Reference of resource persons in the field
10. Development of online/ simulation-based module for a virtual research internship
11. Understanding the nuances of building a deep-technology start-up
12. Study certain entrepreneurs,
13. Study of the enterprises, farmers, artisans, etc.
p
3.2 Developing Research Aptitude
Research aptitude refers to the attribute of inquiry/investigation, analysis and
interpretations in a scientific and objective method that facilitates to uncover facts and
present an individual viewpoint in an organised manner.
Research internship aims at providing hands-on training to work on research tools,
techniques, methodologies, equipment, policy framework and various other aspects in
pursuing quality research.
Apart from gaining relevant research experience, the interns would learn the following,
through research professionals/mentors:
Ideation and conceptualization of a research question/problem
Learning about new tools and handling of equipment
Experimentation and collection of data
Simulations and development of models
Preparation and presentation of reports
Research Internship experience can be gained by working with faculty/scientists/mentors
in HEls, research institutions, universities, Industrial research labs, nationally and
internationally reputed organizations, farmers, and entrepreneurs, using local experts
through recognition of prior learning models and individual persons distinguished in
specific fields. The integration of research, innovation and technology development is the
foundation of Atma-Nirbhar Bharat (Self-reliant India). Institutionalization of internships at
undergraduate levels is expected to play a pivotal role in catalysing the inter-
disciplinary/multi-disciplinary/trans-disciplinary and translational research culture
embedded in NEP-2020.
4.0 INTERNSHIP STRUCTURE
An internship provides learning experiences related to a student’s interest or area ofstudy.
It also gives an opportunity to acquiring new skills. The HEIs are required to play an
important role in arranging internships for their students by creating a structured
--- Page 7 ---
robust mechanism for internship programmes under their Research and Development
(R&D) Cell. The R&D cell may appoint the coordinator or create a well-defined mechanism
or structure at the HEI level for smooth coordination and functioning of internships across
diverse disciplines.
1. Each HEI should have a Nodal Officer who is responsible for developing need and
demand-led verticals as well as expectations from each vertical in undergraduate
programmes. The internship must be well-defined, with clear outcomes. It is
critical to explore, reach out to, and sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with local businesses, research organisations, HEIs, etc. as this will aid in training,
research, employment, and start-ups.
2. To define verticals, HEIs must undertake a survey in the local market to
understand the needs of companies and the expectations of students. These
verticals can be on the basis of industry clusters operational in the country, from
emerging technologies and from the international world of work also.
Industrial regions/clusters may include those places where industries have concentrated
as a result of favourable geo-economic circumstances. These are places where a sizable
portion of the populace works in the manufacturing area, which operates on a sizable scale.
There are indicative clusters identified at central, state, micro and_ local
government/administration levels and HEIs at their own level can identify and also go
beyond these clusters for internships.
Further, there are certain verticals that HEIs may incorporate as options while choosing
a sector by a student while making registration and undergoing an internship/research
internship. The list is indicative only.
1. Trade and Agriculture Area
2. Economy & Banking Financial Services and Insurance Area
3. Logistics, Automotive & Capital Goods Area
4. Fast Moving Consumer Goods & Retail Area
5. Information Technology/Information Technology enabled Services & Electronics
Area
6. Handcraft, Art, Design & Music Area
7. Healthcare & Life Science Area
8. Sports, Wellness and Physical Education Area
9. Tourism & Hospitality Area
10. Digitisation & Emerging Technologies (Internet of Things/Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning/Deep Learning/Augmented Reality/Virtual Reality, etc.)
Area
11. Humanitarian, Public Policy and Legal Service Area
12. Communication Area
13. Education Area
14. Sustainable development Area
15. Environment Area
16. Commerce, Medium and Small-Scale Industries Area
For Instance, Internships in agriculture, and related domains like farm internships,
agriculture research internships, agri-business internships can be considered as an
--- Page 8 ---
opportunity by undergraduate students enrolled in HEls. The agriculture sector needs to
be considered by HEIs for the internship in rural regions. The HEIs/Universities at their
level can explore National Qualification Register and check the possible job roles across
sectors for exploring the internship areas (https://nqr.gov.in/). However, the
HEIs/Universities are open to explore areas beyond that and it can be used as an
indicative only.
3.
Internship would involve a student from a HE] and he/she would be attached to an
internship supervisor (IS), and mentor preferably from the same HEI for a
specified duration and conduct a time-bound internship project. The HEI (parent
Institute) and the Internship Providing Organization (IPO) would play important
roles in facilitating the smooth conduct of the internship.
A provision of group internship may also be considered for handling the chunk
of students in a particular domain by HEls. The group can be identified for a
particular theme assigned to a particular industry or HEI supervised by an
internship supervisor and mentor. Students can also come together and submit
their proposal to the R&D coordinator and then after the examination of the
proposal the cell can approve/reject it. If the proposal is accepted by the cell, then
the allocation of a supervisor as well as a mentor for the same could bemade
as per norms (Student centric rather than Institution Centric). The
HEIs/Universities can also explore the possibilities of joint project works for their
students based on mutual understanding and agreements.
The institution, based on local assessment, programs offered by the
institute/university can identify projects linked to the local industry needs and
create a pool available on the portal. The student chooses a project, and he must
get a supervisor and mentor for it. The mechanism of local industry collaboration
should be one of the focal points of HEIs for providing internship opportunities to
students.
The internship can be linked to the outcomes of value-added/skill-
development/ability enhancement courses. HEIs may have both backward and
forward integrations for internships. For backward integration, the HEIs can make
use of ability-enhancement courses, value-added courses, and skill- enhancement
courses. These courses should serve as a prerequisite for internships and should
be handled as such.
For forward integration the HEIs need to develop a list of projects along with a list
of mentors, the same can be uploaded on the portal developed by HEIs. The
students can pick projects and get paired with chosen mentors along with an
option of co-mentor from the same or any other reputed institution or
organisations.
HEIs need to make their digital portals where they can register experts, agencies,
industries, organisations, mentors, faculty members which are open and visible
to students. HEIs must ensure that these portals have the scope of application
programming interface (API) integration, so that when a central portal is available,
integration can be made.
Students can choose’ industry mentor from  HEIs/ _ research
organizations/industrial R&D  labs/Universities/other national repute
institutions / organizations / industries / emergency professional / NGOs / local
government officials/ outside India experts working at the international
--- Page 9 ---
level/social networking sites (e.g., LinkedIn). The same portal can be developed
at HEI/University level. A centrally managed Internship Portal would help in
arranging the internship by the HEIs for the students. The portal will provide
information regarding various internship opportunities like Internshala, etc
10. Certain experienced people superannuated as research scientists, academics,
industry professionals, farmers, entrepreneurs, local artisans and other experts,
etc. can get registered on a portal as mentors from various disciplines. HEIs may
network with local administration and identify areas where students can work on
assignments or projects that will give them exposure to social issues in the form of
projects.
11. Projects can also be scoped and aligned to the study of the effectiveness of various
government and non-government schemes as well. The live case study assignment
can also be imparted as the project to the individuals which led learners to apply
that learning in the real-life situation depending on the kind of course (e.g. law,
management, social works).
12. The students involved in the internship may continue their internship subject to
the condition that his/her academic credits do not get affected in terms of
attendance and other assignments. If the need arises, students may also have an
opportunity to make use of summer & winter breaks for extending their learning
from internships.
13. HEIs can also look upon cluster models where institutions (2-3) can club or make
a memorandum of understanding (MoU) for internships, the information of same
need to be mentioned on the portal of HEIs and student may be willing to opt any
and choose the mentor physically or digitally or any mentor outside also at
national or international level.
14.There must be a mechanism for the orientation of teachers/ training of
trainers’ /faculty development programs and it should serve as a prerequisite for
the HEls offering the internships in the programme. In the case of the 4-year
program, the policy needs to be framed for students who have an interest in
research right from the beginning at the undergraduate level.
5.0 ACADEMIC CREDENTIALS & MONITORING OF INTERNSHIP
A. Internship
A minimum of 2-4 credits, out of the required minimum 120/160 credits, of a 3-year UG
degree/4-year UG degree (Honours) /4-year UG degree (Honours with Research) can be
assigned for Internship as per the National Higher Education Qualifications Framework
(NHEQF) and Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programme (CCFUP).
An internship of 60 to 120 hours duration after the 4t* semester will be mandatory for the
students enrolled in UG degree programmes.
For an internship, one credit of Internship means two-hour engagement per week.
Accordingly, in a semester of 15 weeks’ duration, one credit in this course is equivalent
to 30 hours of engagement in a semester.
B. Research Project/Dissertations/Thesis/Project work
--- Page 10 ---
For the 4-year UG degree programme (Honours with Research), engagement of students in
the dissertations/research project during the entire 8"" semester of 12 credits will be
considered as a mandatory component for the award of the degree. The students need to
essentially submit the research project/dissertations/thesis/project work to the allotted
mentor. The submission of the report with the conduction of viva will also be a component
for the successful evaluation of the dissertation/research project/thesis/Project work.
The dissertation/research project/thesis work should involve 360 hours’ duration during
the 8‘ semester and it will be mandatory for the students enrolled in UG degree
programmes (Honours with Research).
5.1 Competencies to be developed during Research Internships
3-year UG degree, 4-year UG degree (Honours) and 4-year degree (Honours with Research)
programme will be operating strictly adhering to NEP-2020, NHEQF and CCFUP
provisions. Based on the higher education qualification level descriptors for Level-
5.5 and Level-6 some of the competencies with research orientation should be attained by
the students by studying the courses under the Research Ability Enhancement Courses
(RAEC) and by undertaking the research internship project.
e The students should be well-versed with the techniques and methods of research
that would support knowledge creation.
e The students should have an understanding of complex problem statements and
the ability to develop solutions for real-life problems.
e The students will possess a good comprehension ability to interpret the oral and
written communications in research papers, and present own interpretations.
e The students will be able to communicate technical information, research findings
to the peers.
e The students will be made aware of the research ethics, professional
accountability, conduct and will be able to practice the research ethics and
appropriate skills in in his/her own research work.
e The student will be able to enhance academic productivity by developing writing
and reading skills and can make contributions towards social and economic issues
from their research in future.
e The research intern can possess an attitude and skill of adaptability and flexibility
for new challenges at organisational and individual level with a mind- set of
teamwork and collaborations.
5.2 Duration and Slots for Internship in Curriculum
Each undergraduate student may complete an internship of 2-4 credits during after the 4%
semester of the UG degree programme focussing on Hands-on Training/Short Research
Project. However, the student who has to go for a 4-year UG degree (Honours with
Research) programme will be required to choose courses as given Table 1 during the 8"
semester.
--- Page 11 ---
Table 1: Activities, Suggested Duration along with a corresponding number of credits of
Internship Programme:
S. No. Courses Suggested Duration Suggested Activities Credits
Schedule
1 e 3-year UG After (4) 60 -120 Hands-on Training/Short| 02-04
degree Semester hours Research Project
e 4-year UG Seminar attendance
degree Read assigned journals to prepare
(Honours) for seminars
Study certain entrepreneurs
e 4-year UG Social proj
ocial projects
degree Study of the enterprises/ farmers
(Honours
with
Research)
2 4-year UG 8h Semester | One (i) HEI may adopt Research 08
Degree Semester | Methodology, Research Tools and
(Honours with Techniques, Research Ability
Research) Enhancement and Policy
Framework Courses 12
(ii) Dissertation/Thesis/Project
Work/Research project
Note: Ina 4-year UG degree (Honours) students not undertaking research may do 3 courses for
12 credits in lieu of a research project/dissertation as specified in CCFUP Document.
6.0 ROLE OF INTERNSHIP PROVIDING ORGANISATION, NODAL OFFICER,
INTERNSHIP SUPERVISOR AND MENTOR
6.1 Role of Internship Providing Organisation
Internship Providing Organisation (IPO) is any organisation, HEI, philanthropy, farmer,
government organisation, R&D institutions, research labs, artisans, enterprises,
institution/person of eminence, cooperatives, corporates providing an opportunity to the
student for Internship during the programme
e Internship providing organisation will connect with a nodal officer to look into the
matter of facilitating the interns on arrival with registration, identity cards/ library
cards/ internet subscription/ any other specific requirements, accommodation, etc.
e The mentor from internship providing organisation needs to provide time-to- time
guidance to the candidate to have exposure to the research environment and
employability market.
6.2 Role of Nodal Officer
Nodal Officer is an individual, who will be nominated as a member for the organisation and
execution of internship opportunities in the institution. The person may be from the
Research & Development (R&D) cell of the HEI. He/she will ensure the organization and
--- Page 12 ---
registration of students, mentors, organisations, internship supervisors on the HEI portal
developed for internship.
e Internship Programme will be fully organised, executed and monitored by the R&D
cell of HEI through a Nodal Officer to be appointed by the Vice
Chancellor/Director/Principal/Head of the Department of HEI.
e The nodal officer may reach out to HEIs, research organisations, research labs,
corporates, industry, etc. and moreover to local administrative offices like Deputy
Commissioners and heads of certain government offices like labour,municipal,
hospital, tourism, public relations, finance, agriculture, social welfare, etc. to seek
the opportunity of an internship for the institution. For instance, the students can
participate with local government in processes of census, surveys and elections
and other schemes with proper mentoring mechanisms.
e The nodal officer may take care of the interns during their stay and address
their problems, if any.
e The nodal officer must connect with the organisation and make MOUs so as to
facilitate the students for an internship during the course.
e The nodal officer must ensure the registration of students, internship
supervisors, mentors and internship providing organisation in the portal
6.3 Role of Internship Supervisor
An internship supervisor is any individual who will be nominated by the institution for
monitoring, supervising, and evaluation of the student during the internship duration.
e Internship Supervisor will be nominated at the start of the academic year for each
batch.
e Internship Supervisor from the host institute should monitor the regularity of the
intern at his/her workplace. Students should preferably inform the Internship
Supervisor at least one day prior to availing leave during the internship except for
emergency.
e At the end of the internship, the Internship Supervisor will ensure issuing of
completion certificates to the intern.
e Internship offered by the organisation should be followed by one project report
and the assessment on the evaluation can be judged based on the innovativeness
of that particular project, presentation and attendance by HEIs.
6.4 Role of Mentor
A mentor is an empanelled individual professional who is identified by the HEI or by
students himself/herself through their network. The mentor should be identified and
his/her concurrence should be conveyed to the internship supervisor.
He/she will be providing professional/research guidance to the student during the
internship. The mentors will also facilitate networking with other subject matter
experts/professionals, which will enhance the internship experience and learning of the
intern.
--- Page 13 ---
They shall be making the timely evaluation of a student and provide him completion
certification/report for submission in HEI.
e The mentor needs to provide guidance to the students digitally or physically
throughout the internship duration.
e The mentor needs to check and validate the performance of students fortnightly
and after the completion of the internship, issue the certificate/report.
e The mentor must ensure the learning of competencies with research orientation
among the students during the internship duration.
e HEIs may integrate the job assigned to faculty with workload assessment.
7.0 INTERNSHIP MECHANISM
HEIs should develop a roadmap for the smooth functioning of (i) the internship programme
under the Research and Development Cell at the HEIs, (ii) the office of the nodal officer, (iii)
internship portals and about roles and responsibilities of interns, supervisors and mentors,
iv) a list of projects and v) HEI and internship providing organisation may decide about
Internship on mutually agreed terms and conditions. Internship outcomes should have
been incorporated in developing a perspective among the candidates or students towards
a profession and their ability to deconstruct a job role and to become job-ready as soon as
they enter into a job or a profession.
a)
b)
Students will apply for research internships on their own or through the mentor of
their parent HEI by registering at the internship portal. The HEI should ensure that
such a student has an appropriate orientation for research through research ability
enhancement courses as a part of the curriculum.
Interns will be selected by host organizations based on their selection criteria. The
host organization will arrange to inform the potential intern through the portal itself
or through the mail and will ask for confirmation or for acceptance.
If a student fails to get an internship in physical mode, then the host institute should
have a provision for digital or group internship.
On receipt of an offer of internship, the student will arrange to consult the internship
supervisor, obtain due permission from the parent institution and join the concerned
host organization for an internship as per the suggested schedule.
The student may undergo an internship in the supervisor's lab/ working space at the
host organization. During the period of internship, the parent HEI through the
internship supervisor and mentor, will arrange to keep track of the activities and
performance of students as interns at the host organization, based on periodic reports
submitted by students.
On completion of Internship, intern will prepare internship report and get it endorsed
by mentor.
--- Page 14 ---
Figure 1: Operational Structure of Internship
HEIs will appoint
Nodal Officer
Registration of
Mentor
8.0 EVALUATION
Internship
1. The parent HEI will examine/evaluate the student’s performance following its
evaluation method.
2. The evaluation of the internship will be carried out at the following stages:
a) The interns will be evaluated by research internship supervisor based on their
efforts and research output.
b) The interns will be evaluated through seminar presentation or viva-voce at the
HEI, (marks will be given by a group of experts from HEI including the
supervisor).
3. At HEI, the intern will be evaluated through a seminar/viva voce on his work, by
a duly constituted expert committee (One Internal and One external), on the
following suggestive aspects.
i. Activity logbook and evaluation report of Internship Supervisor
ii. Format of presentation and the quality of the intern’s report
iii. | Acquisition of skill sets by the intern
iv. Originality and any innovative contribution
v. Significance of research outcomes
vi. Attendance
--- Page 15 ---
Research Internship
1.
Internship offered by the organisation should be followed by one project report
and the assessment on evaluation can be judged based on
a. Innovativeness of Research
b. Presentation and,
c. Viva-Voce
The research project report shall have an undertaking from the student and a
certificate from the research supervisor/mentor/advisor for originality of the
work, stating that there is no plagiarism and that the work has not been submitted
for the award of any other degree/diploma in the same Institution or any other
Institution.
The viva-voce examination shall include both internal and external examiner. The
HEIs need to follow their examination structure for the conduction of the
examination.
9.0 MISCELLANEOUS
1. In the case of a 4-year of UG degree programme, the University/HEI may offer 4
credits towards internships over and above the prescribed credits in the 4 year as
per Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programme.
2. HEIs/Universities may oversee and direct the affiliating HEIs for compliance
towards the approved guidelines of internship.