--- Page 1 ---
UGC GUIDELINES
FOR
HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
TO OFFER
APPRENTICESHIP EMBEDDED DEGREE PROGRAMME
(AEDP)
SE
a-fasim fayara
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI- 110002
(2025)
--- Page 2 ---
1. INTRODUCTION
The National Education Policy (NEP) was released by the Government
of India on 29th July 2020. The policy lays emphasis on making
education more holistic and effective by integrating general (academic)
and vocational education while ensuring the vertical and horizontal
mobility of students/learners between academic and vocational
streams. The NEP has prioritized the creation of a _ learning
environment that is more "experiential, holistic, integrated, inquiry-
driven, discovery-oriented, learner-centred, discussion-based and
flexible."
In accordance with the NEP 2020, UGC has framed a new student-
centric “Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate
Programmes” (CCFUP) incorporating a flexible choice-based credit
system, multiple entry and exit options and a multidisciplinary
approach.
Para 16.7 of the NEP makes apprenticeship as crucial to learning in
higher educational institutions, as reproduced below:
sees Different models of vocational education and apprenticeships will
also be experimented by higher education institutions....... ”,
Aligned with the NEP 2020 recommendations and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), the UGC has undertaken various
initiatives to enable youth to become more competent, employable and
global citizens.
There is a need to bridge the gap between ‘what is taught in the class’
and ‘what is required by industry’. The competencies required by the
industry need to be embedded in the university curriculum so that the
Education-Employability gap is bridged. Apprenticeship has a
considerable role to play in bridging this gap.
--- Page 3 ---
World over, apprenticeship is considered the preferred and structured
training for exposure to the real working environment. This combines
work-based learning with theoretical knowledge of related disciplines.
Through apprenticeship, students actively engage with the practical
side of their learning.
The apprenticeship programmes in India are evolving to meet the dual
objectives of fostering skilled manpower and reducing unemployment
among the youth. These programmes are increasingly recognized as a
vital component of the education system, contributing to a more
dynamic workforce that can propel the nation's economic growth and
development. The continued expansion and enhancement of such
programmes will play a crucial role in India’s strategy to effectively
harness its demographic dividend.
2. DEFINITIONS: In these guidelines, unless the context otherwise
requires-
a. Academic Session: means the duration of twelve months
beginning either in Uanuary to February’ or in July to August’,
as the case may be, of every calendar year.
b. Act: means the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of
1956).
c. Apprenticeship Embedded Degree Programme (AEDP):
Programme enabling a student admitted to an undergraduate
programme of the Higher Educational Institution, recognized as
per the UGC Act, 1956, to pursue apprenticeship training as an
integrated component of the degree programme in compliance
with these guidelines.
d. Apprenticeship Rules: The Apprenticeship Rules, 2019 state
that 1. The employers having four or more workers shall only be
eligible to engage apprentices and engagement of apprentices by
establishment having thirty or more number of workers shall be
2
--- Page 4 ---
g.
obligatory; 2. The strength of workers shall be calculated on the
basis of average strength in the preceding financial year; 3.
Within a financial year, each establishment shall engage
apprentices in a band of 2.5 per cent. to 15 per cent. of the total
strength of the establishment including contractual staff, subject
to a minimum of 5 per cent. of the total to be reserved for fresher
apprentices and skill certificate holder apprentices; 4. In no
month, number of apprentices should be less than 2 per cent of
the total strength of the establishment and more than 18 per
cent. of the total strength of the establishment subject to the
condition that he shall fulfill apprentice months corresponding to
minimum 2.5 per cent obligation in a financial year.
The above conditions are as per the Apprenticeship Rules 2019
and the provisions of Apprenticeship Rules, as amended from
time to time shall be applicable.
. Apprenticeship Training: Training in an industry or
establishment under a contract of apprenticeship, which consists
of a basic training component and on-the-job training
(OJT)/practical training at the workplace. Further, as per the
Apprentices Act of 1961, Apprenticeship training means a course
of training in any industry or establishment undergone in
pursuance of a contract of apprenticeship and under prescribed
terms and conditions, which may be different for different
categories of apprentices.
BOAT (Board of Apprenticeship Training) & BOPT (Board of
Practical Training): The Regional Boards of
Apprenticeship/Practical Training set up by the Government of
India at Chennai, Kanpur, Mumbai, and Kolkata as “Autonomous
Bodies” to implement the national scheme of apprenticeship
training in the respective regions.
Commission: means the University Grants Commission
3
--- Page 5 ---
established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956
(3 of 1956).
Establishment: As per the Apprentices Act, 1961: Clause 2(g)
states that “establishment” includes any place where any
industry is carried on [and where an establishment consists of
different departments or have branches, whether situated in the
same place or at different places, all such departments or
branches shall be treated as part of that establishment]; Clause
2(h) “establishment in private sector” means an establishment
which is not an establishment in public sector; Clause 2(i)
“establishment in public sector” means an establishment owned,
controlled or managed by 1. the Government or a department of
the Government; 2. a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); 3. a Corporation
(including a co-operative society) established by or under a
Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned, controlled or
managed by the Government; 4. a local Authority.
The provisions of the Apprentices Act, 1961, as amended from
time to time, shall be applicable.
Higher Educational Institution (HEI): means (i) Universities
included under section 2(f) of the UGC Act, 1956 (ii) Deemed to
be Universities under section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956 (iii)
Institutions funded by Central or State Governments and
empowered to award degrees.
- Industry: As per the Apprentices Act, 1961: Clause 2(k) states
that “industry” means any industry or business in which any
trade, occupation or subject field in engineering or non-
engineering or technology or any vocational course may be
specified as a designated trade or optional trade or both. The
amendments in the Apprentices Act, if any, shall be applicable.
--- Page 6 ---
k. National Credit Framework (NCrF): Framework, notified by
UGC, encompassing elementary, school, higher and vocational
education & training, integrating learning on all dimensions, i.e.
academics, vocational skills and experiential learning, including
relevant experience and proficiency/ professional levels acquired.
National Apprenticeship Training Scheme (NATS): The
National Apprenticeship Training Scheme is one of the flagship
programmes of the Government of India for Skilling Indian Youth
in Trade disciplines. The National Apprenticeship Training
Scheme under the provisions of the Apprentices Act, 1961 offers
Graduate and Diploma students practical, hands-on training-
based skilling opportunities with a duration ranging from 6
months to 1 year.
m. National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS): The
scheme of the Government of India aimed at promoting
apprenticeship training in the country by providing partial
stipend support to the apprentices, undertaking capacity
building of the apprenticeship ecosystem and providing advocacy
assistance to stakeholders.
OBJECTIVES
i. To enhance the employability of students pursuing
Undergraduate level degree programmes.
ii. To focus on outcome-based learning in all degree
programmes to achieve graduate attributes and desired
proficiency levels.
iii. To promote active linkage between higher educational
institutions and industries/establishments.
iv. To bridge the skill gap in the industries by effectively
implementing AEDP in partnership with higher educational
institutions and/or Board of Apprenticeship Training (BOAT) /
Board of Practical Training (BOPT).
5
--- Page 7 ---
il.
ili.
iv.
TRIPARTITE AGREEMENT
To enter a Degree Apprenticeship engagement, it shall be
mandatory to have a tripartite agreement between the recognized
HEI, industry/establishment and the student
(apprentice/learner).
The agreement shall clearly specify the roles and responsibilities
of all three parties.
SCOPE / APPLICABILITY
The Degree Apprenticeship Guidelines are guided by the
fundamental tenets of Apprenticeship as enshrined in the
Apprentices Act, 1961, i.e., the training is managed through a
contract of Apprenticeship, payment of minimum prescribed
stipend to the Apprentice and adherence to the provisions of the
Act.
All Undergraduate (UG) Degree programmes in the disciplines
offered by the HEIs, as specified by the UGC under section 22 (3)
of the UGC Act, 1956, are eligible to embed apprenticeship into
the degree programme, subject to the eligibility as per Point 6 of
these Guidelines. Section 22 (3) of the UGC Act, 1956 states,
“...“degree” means any such degree as may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, be specified in this behalf by
the Commission by notification in the official Gazette.”
The AEDP programme falling under the ambit of a statutory or
regulatory body/council other than UGC shall be offered with the
prior approval of the concerned statutory or regulatory
body/council and in compliance with its guidelines.
An Apprenticeship Embedded Degree Programme shall be treated
at par with the regular UG degree programmes specified by the
UGC under section 22 (3) of the UGC Act, 1956, for all purposes,
including further education and recruitment/employment.
Students graduating from the Apprenticeship Embedded Degree
6
--- Page 8 ---
Programme shall be eligible to take admission in the
Master’s/Ph.D. programme.
ELIGIBILITY OF HEIs:
Any Higher Educational Institution may offer an AEDP
Programme which fulfils the following conditions:
Having ranked in the University category of the National
Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in the latest NIRF
rankings
OR
Having a valid grade/score by the National Assessment and
Accreditation Council (NAAC)
OR
Having a valid basic accreditation by the National Assessment
and Accreditation Council (NAAC) and complying with the criteria
specified by the Commission from time to time.
IMPLEMENTATION
i. The HEIs shall offer the AEDP in compliance with these
guidelines.
ii. The students' apprenticeship training shall be undertaken at
the workplace in the identified discipline/trade.
iii. The HEIs shall have a formal agreement with discipline-
specific industry/establishment to provide apprenticeship
under AEDP. In case multiple industry/establishments are
involved, then, separate agreements are required to be made.
iv. The HEIs may plan the number of seats for apprenticeship
based on the facilities and infrastructure available and the
formal agreement with the industry/establishment.
v. The AEDP shall use standard degree nomenclature as notified
by UGC. The mark sheets/transcripts should mention the
7
--- Page 9 ---
vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
xi.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
credits earned through apprenticeship training and the
industry/establishment where the apprenticeship training
was undertaken.
The HEIs may convert their already running programmes into
the AEDP and take admission accordingly.
Admission to AEDP shall be same as admission to regular UG
programmes.
Based on the National Credit Framework (NCrF), provision for
Multiple Entry-Multiple Exit should be enabled by the HEIs.
Embedding apprenticeship will offer a kind of traineeship
which shall not be undertaken within the university academic
establishment but at the premises of the workplace to get
work-based learning in an identified discipline/trade.
The HEIs_~ shall have _ full (flexibility to schedule
apprenticeships within the programme duration, as per the
best fit of the industry/establishment and itself. However, the
apprenticeship shall not be undertaken in the first semester of
the AEDP, whereas the last semester of the AEDP shall be
dedicated to apprenticeship.
The spells of apprenticeship shall be scheduled either
continuously or at intervals depending upon the requirement
and practicality of the discipline concerned. The spell should
be of at least one complete semester at a stretch.
AEDP Learning Outcomes/Graduate Attributes for both
academic and apprenticeship components shall be defined
with the desired attainment levels. The HEIs shall design an
appropriate curriculum in consultation with the
industry/establishment and shall get the same approved by
its statutory authorities before the launch of the AEDP.
Such curriculum/ courses shall be aligned to the National
Higher Education Qualifications Framework (NHEQF)/
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF).
The area of the apprenticeship programme shall be aligned
8
--- Page 10 ---
with the domain of the degree programme.
xv. The HEIs shall also ensure an appropriate assessment
strategy for evaluating the defined learning outcomes of the
apprenticeship programme, ensuring adherence with the
broad learning outcomes as per the National Higher Education
Qualifications Framework (NHEQF)/NSQF, as the case may
be.
xvi. The Apprentice shall ensure that no simultaneous contracts
are signed with different industries/establishments.
xvii. HEIs interested in implementing the AEDP may seek technical
assistance from the Board of Apprenticeship/Practical
Training (BoAT/BoPT)/Sector Skills Councils/National
Council of Vocational Education and Training (NCVET)
recognized Awarding Bodies on mutually agreed terms.
Note: AEDP programmes being run by the HEIs prior to the
notification of these guidelines shall be governed by UGC
guidelines for HEIs to offer ‘Apprenticeship/Internship
Embedded Degree Programme’, notified in 2020, till the
passing out of the already admitted batches in these AEDP
programmes. However, after the notification of these
guidelines, any fresh admissions in these programmes shall
be as per these guidelines.
8. AEDP DURATION
Sr. No.| Programme Permissible Apprenticeship Embedding
Minimum Maximum
1. UG — 3 years 1 Semester 3 Semesters
2. UG - 4 years 2 Semesters 4 Semesters
Note:
1. The total duration of the programme shall not be altered.
2. The apprenticeship spell shall be for at least one whole semester.
9
--- Page 11 ---
3.
ii.
lil.
10.
10.1
10.2
11.
The permissible apprenticeship embedded duration shall only be
for the apprenticeship training.
CREDIT MECHANISM
For apprenticeship, the credits would be calculated in terms of
duration instead of notional hours. A_ three-months
apprenticeship programme will earn 10 credits.
The credit assignment to an apprenticeship embedded
qualification is subject to the assessment as per the pre-defined
learning outcomes/Graduate Attributes.
The actual hours spent in the industry shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the Apprenticeship Rules as amended from
time to time, whereas for the calculation of credits, the
mechanism at point (i) above shall be applicable.
STIPEND
The HEI shall have an option of offering AEDP either through
registration on the NATS portal or directly in partnership with the
industry/establishment. Based on the option, the stipend will be
paid as per the relevant rules/ guidelines.
Offering of the AEDP directly in partnership with the
industry/establishment: The stipend will be paid by the
industry/establishment as per the Apprentices Act, 1961 &
Apprenticeship Rules, 1992; as amended from time to time.
Offering of the AEDP through registration on the NATS portal:
Stipend will be paid by the government as applicable and as per
the agreement signed for the apprenticeship purpose with the
BOAT/BOPT.
PREPARATION OF APPRENTICESHIP PLAN
An apprenticeship plan shall be developed by the HEIs in collaboration
with
the industry/establishment. The BOATs/BOPT may also be
involved in the development of the plan for onboarding on the National
Apprenticeship Training Scheme (NATS) portal. The HEIs may also use
10
--- Page 12 ---
the services of industry/establishment associations/Sector Skill
Councils (SSCs)/NCVET Awarding bodies to develop and manage the
apprenticeship plan. The apprenticeship plan shall broadly
incorporate the following:
a. Work/Training description in detail.
b. Duration of the apprenticeship training: clearly defined in
months as per the trade requirements.
c. Training Syllabus: Comprehensive curriculum _ covering
Academic component/theoretical aspects and
practical/ Apprenticeship details/schedule.
d. Facilities/Infrastructure/Faculty: Adequate facilities for on-
the-job and classroom training. Also, the availability of the
faculty/experts including the Professor of Practice, as
applicable, ensuring adequacy & appropriateness.
. Credit Mechanism as per the NCrF.
Detailed action plan including minimum attendance required.
. Expected learning outcomes/ graduate attributes.
p> 7 ™ oO
. Assessment/Evaluation Methodology: Assessment for the
apprenticeship component shall be carried out in a semester
pattern.
i. Mechanism to monitor the progress of the apprentice during
the apprenticeship period with explicitly/clearly defined
processes with timelines.
12. ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY OF THE APPRENTICESHIP
COMPONENT OF THE AEDP
The assessment shall be aimed at assessing the skills/ proficiency of
the Apprentice in a work setting as part of the apprenticeship
component.
The assessment of apprentices shall be done, provided the students
concerned have maintained a satisfactory level of attendance during
the apprenticeship period. The HEI concerned shall prescribe the
minimum attendance of the apprenticeship in the
11
--- Page 13 ---
industry/establishment. The HEI shall have the flexibility to structure
the assessment of the apprenticeship component in partnership with
the industry/establishment. The training of the students/apprentices
shall be evaluated and the weightage of various components of the
assessment shall be mutually decided between the HEI and the
industry/establishment as per the following:
A. Evaluation by industry/establishment (min. 30% - max. 40%
weightage).
B. Evaluation by faculty mentor based on the on-site visit(s) (min.
30% - max. 40% weightage).
C. Evaluation through seminar presentation and Viva-
Voce at the HEI (remaining weightage: min. 20% — max.
40%).
Note: For the seminar presentation and Vice-Voce, industry experts
A.
may be invited by the HEI.
Evaluation by industry/establishment (Indicative but not
limited to):
The industry/establishment shall assess the candidates based
on the following parameters - attendance, discipline and
punctuality, familiarity with learning methodologies, skills,
application of skills, comprehension and_ observation,
professional ethics, safety and environmental consciousness,
communication skills, supervisory skills and general conduct
during the period.
Evaluation by faculty mentor (Indicative but not limited to):
The HEI shall depute one faculty member to mentor and evaluate
at least 20-30 students undertaking apprenticeship training.
Such mentors will monitor, guide, and counsel the students as
and when required. The mentorship mechanism should be
detailed in the apprenticeship plan.
Evaluation through seminar presentation and viva-voce at
12
--- Page 14 ---
Note:
13.
the HEI (Indicative but not limited to):
The student will submit a project report and give a
seminar/presentation based on his training report before an
expert committee to be constituted by the concerned department
as per the norms of the HEI. The evaluation shall be based on the
following criteria:
e Quality of content/project report presented
e Effectiveness of presentation
e Depth of knowledge and skills
e The delivery of the project outcome, wherever applicable
e Apprenticeship Report
e Attendance records, daily diary and departmental reports
. The marks provided by the industry/establishment and the
institute shall be averaged to decide the student's final grade.
. The overall credits assignment and the issue of certificates for
the apprenticeship qualification shall be the responsibility of the
HEI concerned in collaboration with the  industry/
establishment.
ROLE OF STAKEHOLDERS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE AEDP
A.
B.
BOATs/ BOPT
a. To be the focal point in driving the apprenticeship as per the
tripartite contract, as applicable.
b. To enable ties between HEI and industry/establishment.
c. To ensure adherence to the guidelines related to stipend,
training andother mandated compliances, as applicable.
HEI
a. The academic institution shall take necessary approval from
its statutory bodies, such as the Academic Council and
Executive Council/Senate, for offering AEDP.
13
--- Page 15 ---
b. Signing of MoU/Agreement/Letter of Confirmation with the
industry/establishment.
c. Preparation of an Apprenticeship Plan in collaboration with
the industry/establishment.
d. Creating the curriculum along with industry/establishment.
e. Implementation of theoretical/classroom learning
components of the AEDP.
f. Ensuring the availability of relevant infrastructure and faculty
with requisite industry/establishment experience, including
Professor of Practice, to deliver AEDP.
g. Assessment.
h. Awarding the AEDP qualification.
i. Credits uploading on the ABC portal.
j. Do all the necessary activities required to improve the quality
of AEDP.
k. In the event of a default by the Industry, the HEI should
consider either moving the students to the conventional
programme or to an alternate industry, as per the choice of the
students.
C.INDUSTRY/ ESTABLISHMENT
a. Signing of MoU/Agreement/Letter of Confirmation with the
HEI(s).
b. Preparation of an Apprenticeship Plan in collaboration with
the HEI.
c. Onboarding the student trainee.
d. Co-creating curriculum/synopsis/written plan of
apprenticeship along with the HEI(s).
e. Delivery and assessment of apprenticeship learning.
f. Adherence to the guidelines under the AEDP related to the
stipend, training and overall outcomes intended for the
programme.
D. STUDENT /LEARNER/ APPRENTICE
14
--- Page 16 ---
a. Submit the training report in the prescribed format.
b. To complete apprenticeship and academic learning as per the
curriculum.
c. To take up the required assessment.
d. To maintain decorum and discipline during the training as per
industry/establishment norms during the apprenticeship
period.
e. The apprenticeship contract shall terminate at the expiry of
the apprenticeship training period.
14. POST TRAINING TRACKING
HEIs are expected to track the outcomes of the pass-outs from such
programmes for a period of at least 1 year after the completion of the
programme to assess the employment and education pathways
pursued by such candidates and contribute to the further
development of AEDP.
15. ROLE OF STAKEHOLDERS UNDER THE TRIPARTITE
CONTRACT
Responsibilities of the Industry/Establishment
i. To comply with the provisions related to health and safety,
compensation for injury and hours of work, leave and holidays,
as per the provisions of the ‘Apprentices Act, 1961’ and
‘Apprenticeship Rules,1992’, as amended from time to time.
ii. To provide the Apprentice with the training as per the approved
programme in accordance with the contract and within the
overall provisions of the Act.
iii. To pay stipend as prescribed by the Government, usually on
completion of every month through bank transfer, at the latest
by the 10*t* of the following month.
iv. To maintain records of the progress of training and assessments
undertaken by each apprentice undergoing apprenticeship
15
--- Page 17 ---
vi.
vii.
viii.
training in his establishment in such form as required under the
course curriculum and as may be prescribed under the Act.
To comply with provisions related to Health and Safety: The
provisions of Chapters III, IV and V of the Factories Act, 1948
shall apply in relation to the health, safety and welfare of the
apprentices as if they were workers within the meaning of that
Act and when any apprentices are undergoing training in a mine,
that provisions of Chapter V of the Mines Act, 1952, shall apply
in relation to the health and safety of the apprentices as if they
were persons employed in the mine. Similar provisions should
also be applicable for apprentices working in any such hazardous
industry/establishment which may have health, safety and
welfare guidelines for employees.
To comply with the provisions related to the Hours of Work, Leave
and Holidays: The weekly and daily hours of work of an
Apprentice while undergoing practical training in a workplace
shall be as determined by the industry/establishment subject to
compliance with the training duration, as applicable.
To provide Compensation for Injury: If personal injury is caused
to an Apprentice by accident arising out of and during his
training asan Apprentice, his industry/establishment shall be
liable to pay compensation which shall be determined and paid,
so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions of the
Employees’ Compensation Act, 1923, subject to the modifications
specified in the Schedule.
To permit apprentices to attend scheduled academic sessions in
between the training period at the HEI campus.
Responsibilities of Apprentices
Conduct and Discipline: The Apprentice shall be governed by the rules
and terms & conditions/regulations (applicable to apprentices) in the
establishment in which the Apprentice is undergoing training.
Responsibilities of the HEI
16
--- Page 18 ---
i. To deliver the programme as per the approved curriculum,
including the monitoring/management of the apprenticeship
component undertaken in partnership with the
industry/establishment.
ii. To have the flexibility to structure the assessment of the
apprenticeship component in partnership with the
industry/establishment in terms of one final end-term
assessment or periodic assessments at the enterprise through
industry/establishment/HEI assessors.
16. TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS FOR OFFERING AEDP
I. A HEI established or incorporated by or under a Central Act
shall offer AEDP programmes as per the territorial jurisdiction
allotted to it under its Act.
Ill. A HEI established or incorporated by or under a State Act
(Public and Private) shall offer AEDP programmes only within
the territorial jurisdiction allotted to it under its Act and not
beyond the territory of the state of its location.
lll. An institution Deemed to be a University established as per
Section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956 shall offer AEDP Programmes
within its headquarters or from those off campuses that are
approved by the Government of India through notification
published in the Official Gazette.
IV. No HEI shall offer AEDP programmes or other related activities
through franchising arrangements.
17. CONSEQUENCES OF THE VIOLATIONS OF THE
GUIDELINES
If any HEI violates the provisions of these guidelines, the Commission
shall constitute an enquiry committee to look into the violations. If the
17
--- Page 19 ---
violations are established by the enquiry committee set up by the
Commission, the HEI shall be:—
a) Debarred from participating in UGC schemes.
b) Debarred from offering degree programmes.
c) Debarred from offering ODL and online mode programmes.
d) Removed from the list of HEIs maintained under Sections 2(f) and
12B of UGC Act 1956.
The HEI shall be subjected to one or more of the above actions.
Further, UGC may take additional punitive actions as per the decision
of the Commission on a case-to-case basis.
18. INTERPRETATION
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency with respect to these
guidelines, the interpretation given by the Commission shall be final
and binding.
KRKKKEKEEK
18