--- Page 1 ---
|| Sttaqeeemenran vq: Ursfartt fee art
AL TN Ys Peretguas wether ||
\ *y A rope stretched along the length of the
A - diagonal produces an area which the vertical and
horizontal sides makes together 7
BAUDHAYAN (G00 BC - #40 BC) C=atb?
~The Vedic Bhartiya Scientist and
Mathematician
paapea ed
“nto peghPCC no,
--- Page 2 ---
=
ae
a 5 3 \ SSS ou
--- Page 3 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2024-25 to 2026-27
All India Council for Technical Education
Nelson Mandela Marg, New Delhi-110070
--- Page 4 ---
This Handbook is a Legal Document as per
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987)
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Mandatory Accreditation of all Programmes/
Courses in Technical Education Institution and University Departments and Institutions
Deemed to be Universities imparting Technical Education) Regulations, 2014
Notified on 29th January, 2014
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approval for conducting Vocational
Education Programme, Community College Course(s) and Skill Knowledge Provider
under National Skill Qualification Framework) Regulations, 2012
Notified on 5th December, 2012 and amended on 3rd February, 2016
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Norms and Standards for the Conduct of Post
Graduate Diploma in Management) Regulations, 2017
Notified on 14th December, 2017
and
UGC (Categorisation of Universities (Only) for Grant of Graded Autonomy)
Regulations, 2018 Notified on 12th February, 2018
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Categorisation of Standalone Institutions (Sls)
for Grant of Graded Autonomy) Guidelines, 2019 Notified on 10th October, 2019
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approvals for Technical Institutions)
Regulations, 2020
Notified on 4th February, 2020 and amended on 24th February 2021
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Open and Distance Learning Education
& Online Education) Guidelines, 2021
Notified on 3rd March, 2021 and amended on 13th April, 2021
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/Staff
Member) Regulations, 2021 vide FNo.1-103/ AICTE / PGRC / Regulation / 2021
Notified on 25th March, 2021
--- Page 5 ---
FOREWORD
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was established in 1945 as a National Level Apex Advisory
Body and as a Statutory body by an Act of Parliament in 1987 for developing and promoting quality technical
education in the country in a coordinated and integrated manner. AICTE is in constant efforts to improve the
quality of technical education in India.
We, at AICTE, are committed to promote holistic, qualitative, inclusive and accessible education in the country
with an aim to make India a technical hub by 2047. AICTE emphasizes social and emotional learning as
a crucial component of Education in line with NEP 2020 and has introduced Universal Human Values as
a mandatory portion in the model curriculum. The core strength to build a technically strong ecosystem in
the country lies in the hands of our institutions and future generations, who have a bigger role to play in the
nation building and development of the country.
Technical education is a pillar in the educational ecosystem, geared towards imparting technical learning
and skills in various fields, from engineering and IT to healthcare and vocational trades. Considering the
same, AICTE is endeavoring to build a transparent and hasslefree technical education ecosystem by ensuring
seamless approvals to the institutions through AICTE Approval Process Handbook.
As envisaged in the provisions laid down in National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the Nations
proactive initiatives towards enhancement of GER, the Council decided to remove the upper limit on
intake allowed earlier for the Courses / Programs offered by existing institutions. This is subject to the fulfillment of
infrastructure availability, its readiness and filled faculty position. Before grant of approval to the increase in
intake sought by the institution, the council shall ascertain the infrastructure and faculty availability through
an EVC.
The Approval Process Handbook of AICTE acts like a roadmap for all institutions seeking approval from
the council to run programmes/courses falling under our ambit. In order to streamline the process, AICTE
made rigorous efforts to make the new APH 2024-27 more concise, easy to understand and implement.
To make this handbook more accessible, AICTE posted the draft of the handbook in the public domain
to seek real feedback and get clear understanding of institutions requirements with AICTE. Based on the
feedbacks/suggestions received from various stakeholders and on rigorous deliberations with experts drawn from
academia and industry, the council proposed various amendments to the approval granting process,
ensuring that the handbook has all the important information, transparent guidelines, minimum procedures
and most importantly AICTE’s reformative decisions. Here’s the snippet of new changes introduced in the
APH:
1. Provision for Extension of Approval up to 3 years for outstanding Institutions.
2: Simplified Regulation for Extension of Approval for the Institutions.
a: Provision for employed/ working professionals to upgrade their academic qualification
/skill sets at diploma/degree/ postgraduate level through flexible mode (timings).
--- Page 6 ---
Undergraduate Programs/Courses in computer applications and management offered through
General Degree Colleges (Non-Technical Institutions) have been brought under the umbrella of
AICTE to ensure coordinated development in technical and management education.
Provision for existing Institutions to introduce undergraduate courses in computer application
(BCA) and management (BBA/BMS).
Introduced Off-Campus provision for well performing existing institutions within the city.
Reduction in compliances related to requirement of land documents and NOC from affiliating
University/ State/ UT Govt.
Provision of Hibernation for the Institutions looking for upgradation/revamping of the facilities.
Enabling provision for merger of Institutions under the Different Trust/ Society/ Company.
More clarity on the approval process for Open and Distance Learning (ODL)/Online Learning
(OL)
All AICTE approved Institutions are empowered to nurture ecosystems for Skilling (through
Vocational courses) via making effective use of existing infrastructure facilities and human
resources.
Essential Norms and Requirements applicable for AICTE approved Institutions/Universities are
made more explicit.
Revised penal action clauses for violation of Norms and Requirements applicable for AICTE
approved Institutions/Universities.
Focus on AICTE Approved Institutions student registration for “One Nation One Student ID
Card” (APAAR ID Card /ABC ID) to avail the benefit of scholarships, rewards and access to
Academic Data.
Huge emphasis on innovation through the INDOVATION program and by establishing
Institution’s Innovation Council (IIC) in their campuses.
The Approval Process Handbook 2024-27 has been created with a progressive approach which
enables institutions to function in the most efficient and effective manner. The role of AICTE in
Technical Education is more like a facilitator than a regulator. From offering internships to job
placements, faculty development programs to student exchange programs, integrating skills in
higher education institutions to introducing courses in emerging areas, AICTE is committed to
enhance entrepreneurship, employability, and skills development.
AICTE shall continue to strive to be a true mentor, facilitator and enabler in bringing out the best
in each Institution. | hope all the education partners/stakeholders of technical education shall add
their value in making India Atma Nirbhar and a technical hub across the globe
Prof. T. G. Sitharam
Chairman, AICTE
ii
--- Page 7 ---
Message from Vice Chairman Desk
Our Hon’ble Prime Minister has given us the target of making Bharat a developed country by 2047. To
achieve this goal, our education sector must evolve to meet the changing needs of students in fast-paced,
digital world. Our educational institutions need to be dynamic, adaptive, emphasize innovation and relevant
to global requirements.
AICTE’s new Approval Process Handbook 2024-25 to 2026-27 is definitely a step in this direction.
As per AICTE’s new handbook, a streamlined approval process has been created with less complexity
fostering more transparency and faster decision making. For the very first time, the draft of Approval
Process Handbook was put out in the public domain to seek feedback from diverse audience to encourage
transparency and collaboration and some good suggestions were included in the final version of APH.
Hon’ble Chairman AICTE has already elaborated in detail major changes introduced in current APH.
However, to reiterate a few, from this year more flexibility is given to Colleges to propose their student intake
capacity, lesser document requirements for land and building, initiating approval process through a single
window, etc.
Also, as the demands of the job market evolves, so do the educational needs of Students. Hence, from this
year AICTE decided to give approvals for Diploma/ BE/BTech/ME/MTech/MBA, etc. programmes for working
professionals. This move is definitely going to give huge opportunity to working professionals to upgrade
their skills and education simultaneously. Now every technical working professional will have an opportunity
to pursue education without quitting job or taking long leave.
More importantly, as we approach the dawn of a new era, it becomes increasingly imperative to realise the
importance of technical education in shaping a better tomorrow. Through technical education, the country
can continue to produce a steady stream of innovators and entrepreneurs who can drive technological
progress and advance its standing in the global knowledge economy. New Approval Process Handbook
2024-2027 is step towards fulfilling our Education Goal of 2047 laid out by our Prime Minister.
Dr. Abhay Jere
Vice Chairman, AICTE
iii
--- Page 8 ---
Message from Member Secretary Desk
“All efforts have been made to simplify the system to a larger extent and a process has been developed which
is transparent and trust based in line with the vision of the Government. Institution can avail approval for
larger duration and flexibility has been given to become multidisciplinary institutions.
As per provisions of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, provision for upgradation of qualification of
Working Professionals has been introduced. More emphasis has been given on Skilling, Multiple Entry & Exit
and integration of Vocational Education with main stream education. For internationalisation of technical
education, twinning programme and collaborative programmes have been encouraged.
Teachers, who are the central point of education, are being trained with a newer technologies through ATAL
Academy and NEAT. Large number of internships are being provided to students through AICTE internship
portal. With all such initiatives and policy reforms our students will not only perform nationally but also
compete internationally.”
Prof. Rajive Kumar
Member Secretary, AICTE
iv
--- Page 9 ---
INDEX
1 Foreword i
2 Abbreviations vi
3 Definitions viii
4 Preamble xii
5 Chapter-I Grant of Approval for New Institution 1
6 Chapter-Il_ Grant of Extension of Approval for Existing Institutions 11
7 Chapter-IIl_ Collaboration & Twinning Programmes 33
8 Chapter-IV Grant of Approval for Universities 37
9 Chapter-V Approval for Open and Distance Learning (ODL) / Online Learning (OL) 45
10 Chapter-VI Standard Norms and Requirements 53
11 Chapter-VIl Penal Action on Violation of Norms 70
12 Chapter-VIll DOS and DON'TS 75
13 Annexures 77
14 Affidavits 172
15 Formats & Certificates 188
--- Page 10 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ABBREVIATIONS
| Abbreviations
ACA Access and Circulation Area EWS Economically Weaker Section
ADF AICTE Doctoral Fellowship FAR Floor Area Ratio
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education FDR Fixed Deposit Receipt
AlU Association of Indian Universities FPM Fellow Programme in Management
APAAR Automated Permanent Academic FSI Floor Space Index
Account Registry GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
ATAL AICTE Training and Learning Academy GMAT Graduate Management Aptitude Test
ATMA Association of Indian Management Gol @ovcmnment of lndl=
peared tale! Test for Management GPAT Graduate Pharmacy Aptitude Test
APH Approval Process Handbook GPS Global Positioning System
ARIIA Atal Ranking of Institutions on rl Higher Educational Institute
Innovation Achievements HMCT Hotel Management and Catering
BCA Bachelor of Computer Application Technology
BBA Batchelor of Business Administration CCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations
BBS Beitdicler of Business Siudias EV Innovation, Entrepreneurship and
7 Venture Development
BMS Batchelor of Management Studies KS indian Knowledge System
B. Des. Bachelor of Design oT Internet of Things
BE. Bachelor of Engineering IM Indian Institute of Management
B. HMCT Bachelor of Hotel Management and
Cettsning Techmelleryy ISc Indian Institute of Science
BoG Board of Governors IT Indian Institute of Technology
BoM Board of Management J&K vommulsikos hong
BOT Built Operate and Transfer KD) Liquid Crystal Display
B. Sc Bachelor of Science LMS Learning Management System
B. Tech Bachelor of Technology lan Letter of Approval
B. Voc Bachelor of Vocation val Lsiiter lla
CABE Central Advisory Board of Education Ueabs Letter of Rejection
CAT Common Admission Test BRE Eating extremism
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education ae PrN D Sgn M paupey est
CCTV CléscdiGircuititelavisian MBA Master of Business Administration
CMAT Common Management Admission Test Mbps Megabits per Second
CPWD Central Public Works Department MCA Master of Computer Application
DELNET Developing Library Network Mj Des Master of Design
DDA Delhi Development Authority WUE Master of Engineering
DME Directorate of Medical Education IMCL Meson ofiiotell Moaggemen and
- : Catering Technology
DPR Debiilsc-Rroieet Report MMS Master of Management Studies
DSC Digital Signature Cerifiegte MoA IMemmblandam of Assocatian
DTE Directorate of Technical Education MODROBS | Modernization and Removal of
D. Skill Diploma of Skill Obsolescence Scheme
D. Voc Diploma of Vocation MoE Ministry of Education
EC Executive Committee of AICTE MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses
EoA Extension of Approval MoU Memorandum of Understanding
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning M. Pharm Master of Pharmacy
EVC Expert Visit Committee M. Tech Master of Technology
vi
--- Page 11 ---
Approval Process Handbook
M. Pharm Master of Pharmacy PGRC Public Grievance Redressal Cell
M. Tech Master of Technology Ph. D Doctor of Philosophy
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation FCAT Firerelnein ineintt_eweinel Wilkes Vejaine
Council PM-USPY Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha
NAD National Academic Depository Fiteiscinln joing
- - - PPP Public Private Partnership
NAD Neem ae etemilis Bt oesrely) PwBD Persons with Benchmark Disabilities
NATA National Aptitude Test in Architecture QP @Queliffiactiion Reds
NATS National Apprenticeship Training Qs* Quacquarelli Symonds
Scheme R&D Research and Development
NBA National Board of Accreditation RBI Reson Ben ot Indie
NBC National Building Code RC Regional Committee
= — = RF Radio Frequency
NBCC National Buildings Construction R Regional Offi
Corporation © edicng Uso
NDL National Digital Library of India RPGF Refundable Performance Guaranty Fund
NEP Niifonel] Eeluactitem Rellisy RPS Research Promotion Schemes
NEAT National Education Alliance for SAC Standing Appellate Committee
Technology SAGY Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana
NEQIP North East Quality Improvement SAMVAY Skills Assessment Matrix for Vocational
Programme Advancement of Youth
NHEQF National Higher Education Qualification SCSC Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee
Framework SD Security Deposit
NIRF National Institutional Ranking SEE Gustetinebls Enexay Eagincaaine
Framework = = =
F F SHC Standing Hearing Committee
NIT National Institute of Technology ; -
‘ ‘i 7 SIH Singapore India Hackathon
NITTTR National Institute of Technical Teachers = = =
Training and Research SKP Skill Knowledge Providers/ Trainers
NMAT National Management Aptitude Test SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young
7p Ps Aspiring Minds
NOC No Objection Certificate
NPTEL National Programme on Technology SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young
Enhanced Learning PRABHA Aspiring Minds DTH Channels
Rb Non Resident Indian TDS Tax Deduction at Source
RED National Skill Development Agency TELNET Terminal Emulation Programme for
NTA National Testing Agency TCP/ IP Networks
Ocl Overseas Citizen of India TER Technical Education Regulatory
PC Personal Computer TFW Tuition Fee Waiver
PF Provident Fund THE Rank Times Higher Education Ranking
PG Post Graduate UA Urban Agglomeration
PGCM Post Graduate Certificate in UG Under Grodubte
Management GCE Onwokihy Grxce —
PGDBM Post Graduate Diploma in Business ners a RU
Management UHV Universal Human Values
PGDCA Post Graduate Diploma in Computer UT Union Territory
Application Wi-Fi Wireless Fidelity
PGDM Post Graduate Diploma in Management XAT Xavier's Aptitude Test
* British company specialising in the analysis of higher education institutions around the world.
vii
--- Page 12 ---
Approval Process Handbook
DEFINITIONS
1 “Academic Year” means academic activities of the concerned affiliating University/ Board/Technica
Institution in a Year (Odd Semester followed by Even Semester).
2 | ‘Act’ means the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987).
3 “Adjunct Faculty” means resource person as per the guidelines given in Annexure 9 of the Approva
Process Handbook.
4 | “Advocate” means an Advocate registered with the Bar Council of India.
“Affidavit” is a written sworn statement of fact voluntarily made by a deponent under an oath or affirmation
5 | administered by a person authorized to do so by Law. Such statement is witnessed as to the authenticity o
the deponent’s signature by a taker of oaths, such as: a Notary Public or Commissioner of Oaths.
6 | “AICTE Web-Portal” means the website hosted by the Council at URL www.aicte-india.org.
“Applicant” is the one who makes an application to the Council for seeking any kind of approval under these
7 Regulations.
8 “Approval Process Handbook (APH)”is a Handbook published by AICTE, prescribing norms and procedures
for processing of applications submitted for grant of various approvals from time to time.
9 | “Approved Institution” means an Institution offering Technical Programmes approved by the Council.
0 “Approved Intake” means the maximum number of students that can be admitted in a Course (excluding the
Supernumerary Seats) as approved by the Council.
“Architect” means an Architect registered with the Council of Architecture established under the Architects
1 | Act, 1972.
2 “Autonomous Institution” means an Institution to which autonomy is granted by UGC and is designated to be
so by the Statutes of affiliating University/ Board or by AICTE to Standalone Institutions.
3 “Bandwidth Contention” means the contention ratio, the ratio of the potential maximum demand to the
actual bandwidth.
4 “Break in EoA’ means break in obtaining Extension of Approval by an Institution on their-own in the
previous year(s). Hibernation” Approval in abeyance with the permission of Council.
5 “Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT)”means a project financing, wherein a private entity Receives a concession
from the public sector to finance, design, construct and operate Facility stated in the concession contract.
6 | “Chairman” means the Chairman of AICTE as described under sub-section 4(a) of Section 3 of the Act.
7 | “Co-ed Institution” means the Institution admitting male, female and transgender students.
8 | “Commission” means the University Grants Commission established under Section 4 of the UGC Act, 1956.
9 | “Company” means a Company established/ registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.
“Competent Authority for Admission “means an Organization that has ,the legally delegated authority,
20 capacity, or power to do admission to Technical Institutions in the State Government/ UT concerned.
“Compliance Report” means the Report submitted by the Technical Institution complying with the
21 | requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the deficiencies observed by Expert Visit
Committee/issues mentioned in the Show Cause Notice/Speaking Order.
22 “Constituent College” means an Institution’ Department/ College/ School which forms a Part of the
University.
23 “Contractual Faculty” means a resource person as per the guidelines given in Chapter VII of the Approval
Process Handbook
24 | “Council” means All India Council for Technical Education established under Section 3 of The AICTE Act.
25 “Course” means one of the branches of learning in a Programme such as Civil Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, etc.
viii
--- Page 13 ---
Approval Process Handbook
“Division” means
¢ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) or Thirty (30) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in
Engineering and Technology, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in
Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ Post Graduate Courses in Computer Applications and
ManagementProgramme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) or Th irty (30) seats in Under Graduate Degree Courses in
Computer Applications or Management excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in Planning
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Applied Arts
and Crafts Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Design
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Thirty (30) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and
Technology/ Planning/ Applied Arts and Crafts/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Fifteen (15) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Design Programme, excluding
supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Integrated Degree Courses in Engineering and
Technology/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA Programme and Integrated Degree
Course in MBA Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
¢ A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in an Integrated Degree Course in Planning Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any; and
¢ Amaximum of Twenty (20) seats per year in Fellow Programme in Management Programme.
“EoA’ means Extension of Approval granted by AICTE for the conduct of Technical Programme(s)/
27 Course(s) to an Institution for that Academic Year. “Extended EoA’ means Extension of Approval grant-
ed by AICTE for the conduct of Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) to an Institution for more than one
Academic Year.
28 | “Executive Committee” means the Committee constituted by the Council under Section 12 of AICTE Act.
“Expert Visit Committee (EVC)” means the Committee constituted by the Regional Officer as per the
29 | composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to verify offline/ online the availability of
Infrastructural facilities of an Institution.
30 “Faculty member” means an individual qualified as per AICTE Regulations, working on Full Time basis in an
Institution/ University.
31 “Foreign National”means the Citizen of the Countries other than India who are not of Indian origin as de-
fined under OCI.
“Government aided Institution” means a Technical Institution that meets 50% or more of its recurring
32 . L rey
expenditure out of the grant received from Government or Government Organizations.
33 “Government Institution” means Technical Institution established and/ or fully maintained by the
Government.
“Head of the Institution"means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a University or an Institution Deemed to be
34 | University, the Principal/Director/such other designation as the Administrative Head of the Institution of the
Technical Institution referred.
35 | “Honours” means degree awarded by a University as per its prevalent norms
36 “Institution Deemed to be University” means an Institution for Higher Education so declared, on the
recommendation of the Commission, by the Central Government under Section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956.
--- Page 14 ---
Approval Process Handbook
37
a
“Lateral Entry” means admission of students into the second year of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree
Courses as per Chapter VII of the Approval Process Handbook.
38
“Level” means Diploma, Post Diploma Certificate, Under Graduate Degree, Post Graduate Diploma and
Post Graduate Degree Programmes
39
“Minority Institution” means an Educational Institution established and administered by a minority Trust/
Society/Company and recognized by Competent Authority as Minority Institution up to the duration
specified.
40
“NBA’ means the National Board of Accreditation, an autonomous body initially set up by AICTE,
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
4]
“Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” means an Indian Citizen who is ordinarily residing outside India and holds an
Indian Passport.
4]
Off Campus-A constitutent unit of an Institution under the same Trust, Society or company.
42
“Open and Distance Learning (ODL)” mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities by
overcoming separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print, electronic, MOOCs,
online and occasional interactive face-to-face meetings arranged by an Institution through Learner Support
Services to deliver teaching-learning experience, including practical or work experience.
43
Online Learning (OL) mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities by overcoming
separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print ,electronic, MOOCs in a totally
Online mode
44
“Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)” means a Foreign national, who was eligible to become Citizen of India
on 26.01.1950 or was a Citizen of India on or at any-time after 26.01.1950 or belonged to a territory that
became part of India after 15.08.1947. Minor children of such person are also eligible for OCI. However, if
the Applicant had ever been a Citizen of Pakistan or Bangladesh, he/ she will not be eligible for OCI.
45
“
Private University” means a University duly established through a State/Central Act by a sponsoring body
viz., a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860, or any other corresponding Law for the
time being in force in a State or a Public Trust or a Company registered under Section 8 of the Companies
Act, 2013.
46
“
Programme” means the field of Technical Education, i.e. Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy,
Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts and Crafts, Design, Hotel Management and Catering Technology,
MCA, Management (PGCM/PGDM/MBA) and such other Programmes/ areas as notified by the Act.
47
“
Public Private Partnership (PPP)” means a Partnership based on a contract or concession Agreement,
between a Government or Statutory entity on the one side and a Private Sector enterprise on the other side.
48
“
Regular Courses”means the Courses offered in the timings of Regular Shift, First Shift, Second Shift and
Part Time shall be considered as Regular Courses. The Institutions shall have to fulfil all facilities suchas
Infrastructure, Faculty and other requirements to offer the Regular Courses as per the norms specified in the
Approval Process Handbook for the Total Approved Intake and the Institutions may conduct the Courses in
the timings of Regular Shift, First Shift, Second Shift and Part Time not exceeding the “Approved Intake” of
each Course, as per the convenience of all stakeholders.
49
“Restoration of Intake” means restoring back to the “Approved Intake” of the Institution that was existing prior
to any penal action.
50
“Self-Financing Institution” means an Institution started by a Trust/ Society/ Section 8 Company and does not
receive grant/fund from Central/ State Government/ UT for meeting its recurring expenditure.
51
“Society” means a Society registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
52
“Standalone Institutions” means those Institutions which are not affiliated to any of the University/ Board,
but are imparting education by means of conducting regular Courses leading to Diploma/Post Diploma
Certificate/Post Graduate Certificate/Post Graduate Diploma Levels in Management, Travel and Tourism,
Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Computer Applications and Design.
53
“Standing Appellate Committee (SAC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for considering the appeals of the Technical Insti-
tutions.
54
“Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per
the composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the Scrutiny of Complaints received against
the Technical Institutions.
--- Page 15 ---
Approval Process Handbook
“Standing Hearing Committee (SHC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
55 | composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to review the Reports of Expert Visit Committee/
replies received for Show Cause Notices.
56 “State Level Fee Committee” means a Committee notified by the concerned State Government/ UT for Reg-
ulation of Fee to be charged by the Technical Institutions.
“Supernumerary seats” means Intake over and above the “Approved Intake” which includes TFW, OCI
57 |/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries, Lateral Entry, PwBD, Kashmiri
Migrants and PM-USPY seats notified from time to time and for working professionals.
“Technical Institution” means an Institution set up by the Government or Trust/ Society/ Company for
conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in the field of Technical Education, Training and Research in
58 | Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design, Hotel
Management and Catering Technology, Computer Applications, Management, and such other Programmes
and areas as notified by the Act.
59 | “Total Approved Intake” includes Intake approved in all the Programme(s)/ Course(s) of an Institution.
60 “Trust” means a Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any other
relevant Acts.
61. | “University Department” means a Department established and maintained by the University.
62 | “University” means a University defined under the UGC Act, 1956.
Any other word and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the All India Council for
63 | Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987), shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the said
Act.
XI
--- Page 16 ---
PREAMBLE
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was set up in November, 1945 with a view to stimulate, coordinate
and control the provisions of Educational facilities and industrial development of the post war period. Accordingly,
AICTE Act, 1987 was passed by the Parliament with a view to ensure proper planning and coordinated development
of the Technical Education System throughout the Country, qualitative improvement of such Education in relation to
the planned quantitative growth and the Regulation and proper maintenance of norms and standards in the Technical
Education System and for matters connected therewith. As per the act technical education means, “Programmes of
Education, Research & Training in Engineering & Technology, Architecture, Town Planning, Management, Pharmacy,
and Applied Arts & Crafts and such other programmes or areas as the Central government may in consultation with
the Council declare by notification in the official gazette”.
Important Provisions of AICTE Act, 1987 in Approval Process
10(g) Evolve suitable performance appraisal system for Technical Institutions and Universities imparting Technical
Education, incorporating norms and mechanisms for enforcing accountability.
10(i) | Lay down norms and standards for Course Curriculum, Physical and Instructional facilities, Staff patterns, Staff
qualifications, Quality instructions, Assessment and Examination.
10(k) Grant approval for starting new Technical Institutions and for Introduction of new Courses or Programmes in
consultation with the Agencies concerned.
10(n) Take all necessary steps to prevent commercialization of Technical Education. 10(p) Inspect or cause to inspect
any Technical Institution.
11(1) For the purposes of ascertaining the financial needs of Technical Institution or a University or its standards of
teaching, examination and research, the Council may cause an inspection of any Department or Departments
of such Technical Institution or University to be made in such manner as may be prescribed and by such person
or persons as it may direct.
11(2) The Council shall communicate to the Technical Institution or University the date on which any inspection
undersub-section(1)istobemadeandthe Technical Institution or Universityshall beentitledto beassociatedwiththe
inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.
11(3) |The Council shall communicate to the Technical Institution or the University, its views with regard to the results
of any such inspection and may after ascertaining the opinion of that Technical Institution or University the
action to be taken as a result of such inspection.
11(4) All communications to a Technical Institution or University under this Section shall be made to the executive
authority thereof, and the executive authority of the Technical Institution or University shall report to the Council the
action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for the purposes of implementing any such recommendations as
is referred to in sub-section (3).
Future of Technical Education in India
It has been and shall always be the endeavor of AICTE to bring the best educational system for its students taking
cognizance of NEP that calls for social and emotional learning which is a crucial component of education.
All the activities of AICTE are focused towards the changes as proposed in the NEP 2020 since last four years by means
of various initiatives such as preparation of ‘Short & Medium Term’ Perspective Plans for Engineering Education in India
which focusses on the demand for courses on in emerging technological areas.
AICTE is receptive to the technological changes happening across the global scenario and believes in framing new
policies & initiatives and augment the existing ones by scheduling workshops, conferences etc. providing a platform of
discussion and inputs from stakeholders.
XII
--- Page 17 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-|
Grant of Approval for New Institution
Grant of Approval for setting up a “New Technical Institution” offering a Technical Education Programme(s) in
Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate / Under Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree / Post
Graduate Certificate.
1.1 Introduction
a. — The New Technical Institution shall be established by providing Infrastructure and other requirements as
per the norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
b. — New Technical Institution offering Technical Course(s) / Programme(s) shall NOT be established without
prior approval of the Council.
c. Admission Authority/ Body/ Institution shall not admit students to any Technical Programme of an
Institution, which do not have requisite prior approval of the Council.
d. The applications received by the Council shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.
e. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central, State and Local Laws and norms of other
Regulatory Bodies also, if applicable.
f. State Government / UT providing financial assistance for establishment of Technical institutions in order
to offer the Technical Course (s) / Programs at DIPLOMA/UG/PG level. The Government must have
requisite land for establishment of new institute.
g. It is not mandatory for State Public, Private Universities and Central Universities to take AICTE
approval as per the AICTE Act. However, Universities shall seek approval of AICTE for availing the benefits
of AICTE Schemes/Initiatives as per the prevailing policies/norms to maintain the standards and norms as
prescribed.
h. — Applications which were rejected and issued Final LoR in the previous academic year AY 2023-24 may
apply afresh for approval as per applicable TER charges.
1.2 Timeline
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE Website from
time to time, inviting applications along with detailed time-lines
b. — The submission of an application on AICTE Web Portal and payment shall not be later than the last date
as notified in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website.
1.3. Application for Seeking Approval of the Council
1.3.1 To grant approval for establishment of a Technical Institution, online application on AICTE Web Portal
through National Single Window System(NSWS) is mandatory. Application submitted offline shall NOT be
accepted.
1.3.2 For Setting up a New Technical Institution proposed to offer a Programme in.
--- Page 18 ---
Approval Process Handbook
a. Engineering and Technology / Planning / Applied Arts and Crafts / Design/ Hotel Management
and Catering Technology (Diploma/ Under Graduate / Post Graduate)
b. | Computer Applications (Under Graduate / Post Graduate)
c. Management (Under Graduate/Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree)
1.3.3 For the existing Institutions approved by other Regulatory Bodies, seeking approval for the first time
from AICTE for conducting Technical Programme(s):
a. Offering Course(s) in Applied Arts and Crafts/ Vocational (Technical) Programme without having
approval from AICTE.
b. Non-Technical Institutions already running Under Graduate courses (BCA/ BBA/ BMS etc.) and Post
Graduate courses (MCA/ MBA etc.) in Management and Computer Applications without approval of
AICTE
NOTE: Exclusive building and Director/Principal are not required for Institutions under 1.3.3 (b)
However, the Institutions should fulfil all other norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook
such as separate Head of the Department, Faculty, Infrastructure, Built-up area, etc.).
1.3.4 — Eligibility of the Promoter
a. A Society, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/ Secretary of
Society; or A Trust, registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any
other relevant Acts through the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust;
or
A Company established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.
or
b. Central/ State Government/ UT Administration or by a Society/ Trust registered with them.The above
bodies shall apply individually or under Public Private Partnership (PPP)/ Build-Operate- Transfer (BOT)
mode through an Officer authorized by Central/ State Government/UT.
A Company having any foreign equity directly or indirectly as shareholding shall NOT be permitted to
apply for setting up a Technical Institution (with exceptions provided by the Government).
1.4 Submission of online Application by the Promoter
1.4.1. Submission of online application through NSW portal & Allotment of USER ID for AICTE portal
a. All new institutions shall register on NSW portal and the registered application will be re-directed to
AICTE web portal.
b. An unique USER ID with password shall be allotted to each new application on payment of
Rs. 6000 (Rupees Six Thousand only), through the payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
@ www.aicte-india.org
c. In case the allotted password is forgotten, the Institution shall apply online for a new password.
Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of Rs. 6000 (Rupees Six Thousand only) shall be made
through AICTE web portal. The proof of payment and an Affidavit 1 for “Forgotten Password” shall be
submitted to AICTE through the portal for allotment of new Password to the Applicants.
d. Using the allotted credentials, Online application in the prescribed Form shall be filled and
submitted on AICTE Web-Portal@ www.aicte-india.org and an unique identification number will be
2
--- Page 19 ---
Approval Process Handbook
allotted to each application for further reference. The Applicant shall be able to track the status of the
application at various stages of processing using this unique identification number.
1.4.2 Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges Rs. in Lakh for setting up a new Technical Institution
offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree are given in Table1.1:
Table 1.1 - Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges (Per Year)
i Government /Institution setup in J&K / Leh & Ladakh / North Eastern 1.00
states/PwBD / Institution setup exclusively for women ,
ii All other Institutions (including Minority & Government-Aided Institution) 10.00
oe All Applicants under (i) and (ii) whose applications were rejected and Govt : 0.25
"| issued Final LoR in the previous academic AY 2023-24** Others : 1.00
** Not applicable for Applications, which were rejected in the last academic year and TER Charges
refunded under Clause 1.4.2 (h)
NOTE: 10% TER charges will be increased annually.
b. All the new applications shall be processed as per the procedure described in Annexure (Scrutiny,
Re-Scrutiny, EVC, SAC/SHC).
c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing Hearing Committee/
Standing Appellate Committee (including Court directions to any type of Institutions) has to be conducted,
then the Applicant has to remit Rs. 0.60 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.
d. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee (Online/Physical) has
to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the Applicant has
to remit Rs.1.25/Rs. 2.50 Lakh respectively through online as an additional TER Charges.
e. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
@ www.aicte-india.org within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.
f. Only those applications submitted within the cut-off date, including payment shall be considered for
processing.
g. Incase of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be refunded to the
Applicant.
h. — Applications submitted under Clause 1.3.2, if rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny without
availing the appeal provision, the TER Charges after a deduction of Rs.0.60 lakh shall be refunded to the
Applicant/Institution.
i. In case of rejection of an application submitted under Clause 1.5.2, if opted for the issue of Extension of
Approval of the existing Programme(s), refund shall be made after deducting the applicable TER Charges.
--- Page 20 ---
1.4.3
A4
A5
4.6
1.4.7
1.5.
1.5.1
1.5.2
Approval Process Handbook
All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited in their online application on AICTE web portal
@ www.aicte-india.org are correct. Facility to edit the data will be available until the final submission of the
application. After the final submission, the data entered is not allowed for any further editing till the
processing of the application is completed. All the documents to be submitted along with on online
applications should be DIGITALLY SIGNED (using Digital Signature Certificate-DSC) and submitted on
AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as notified in the Public Notice / AICTE web-portal.
NOTE: Institutions shall NOT be Permitted to Submit Applications without DSC.
All Applicants shall submit an Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public Notary or an
Oath Commissioner on Rs.100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper (Digitally Signed). In case of
any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, civil and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.
All the Applicants shall submit a copy of the application (as submitted on AICTE portal) to the State
Government/UT and affiliating University/ Board immediately and get a receipt with the Official
Seal from the authorized signatory for the same.
All the Applicants shall upload one set of documents as per Annexure-1 of APH (Digitally Signed by Chairman
/Secretary of the Trust /Society /Company) on AICTE web portal. Any document uploaded on AICTE web
portal without Digital Signature shall not be considered as valid document.
NOTE: Online Applications complete in all respects (including processing fee, if applicable) shall
ONLY be processed as per the procedure defined in this Approval Process Handbook.
AICTE gives approval to Institutions based on the norms / standards prescribed by the Council from time to
time. To get permission from State Government/ Affiliating University /Board is the sole responsibility of the
Institution.
Establishment of a New Technical Institution
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the Land and built-up area as required and its
Lawful possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company on or before
the date of submission of application.
b. Requirements for Technical Institution shall be as per the norms specified in Chapter VI of the
Approval Process Handbook.
c. Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be prepared by an
Architect registered with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor and shall be approved by the
Competent Authority, designated by concerned State Government/ UT. However, Infrastructure
requirements for the First Academic Year should be completed in all aspects.
d. The Head of the “Technical Institution” shall be designated as the “Principal/ Director” having
qualifications as per AICTE norms.
The existing Institutions applied for Closure of the Institution are also eligible to apply for starting a new
Technical Institution in the same premises in the same Academic year. Technical Institutions applying under this
Clause shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure of the Institution for the existing
Programme(s) and shall apply for a different Programme. However, the Applicant has to make Material/
Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan, Site Plan, etc. duly approved by the concerned Competent
Authority (if applicable) to suit the requirements of the new Programme.
--- Page 21 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1.5.3
1.5.4
1.5.5
1.5.6
1.6
a. In case of such application being approved, the existing Institution shall be considered as CLOSED
(Progressive/ Complete Closure, as applicable) and the liabilities, if any, arising out of this, shall
solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution.
b. In case of the application being rejected, the same shall be processed for the Closure of the Insti
tution/ issue of Extension of Approval as per the choice mentioned in the application.
The fund position of the Applicant shall be in the form of FDRs and/ or Bank accounts in the
Nationalized Bank or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by Reserve Bank of India as
mentioned in the Table 1.2, on the date of Scrutiny. However, for Government/ Government
Aided Institution/ Central/ State University, Government must have budget provision of minimum RS. 100
lakh and requisite land / built-up area for establishment of new institute.
Table 1.2 - Required Fund position for New Technical Institute
i | Engineering and Technology 100
ii | Planning 50
iii | Applied Arts and Crafts 50
iv | Design 50
v__| Hotel Management and Catering Technology 50
vi | Computer Applications 50
vii | Management 50
Institutions other than Government cannot use the name of Technical Institution in such a way that the
abbreviated form of name of the Technical Institution becomes IIM/IIT/IISc/NIT/IISER/IIT/IEST/
AICTE/UGC/ MoE/Gol.
The Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government/ India/ Indian/ National/ All India/ All
India Council/ Commission in the name of the Technical Institution giving an interpretation that it is
a Govt. Institute while being a fully Private Institute and other names as prohibited under the Emblems
and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided that the restrictions mentioned above
shall not be applicable, if the Technical Institution is established by the Government of India or its
name is approved by the Government of India.
Applicants shall NOT use the names of the existing Institutions within the State. The existing Institutions
having the same names run by the same/different Society/Trust/Company within the State/ UT shall at least
add the name of the Village/Town/City where it is located as an integral part of the name of the Institution.
All Institutions shall use the same font and size for the full name of the Institutions, wherever it is displayed.
Appointment of Principal/Director and Faculty in Newly Approved Institution/ Programme
a. New Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval shall comply with the appointment of Faculty/
Principal/ Director as the case may be, as per Policy regarding minimum qualifications, pay scales etc.,
as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
b. Institutions shall appoint Faculty/Principal/Director, other Technical Supporting Staff and Administrative
Staff strictly in accordance with the methods and procedures of the concerned affiliating University/
Board, State Government/ UT and Hon'ble Court directions, if any, and as applicable in the case of
selection procedures and Selection Committees.
c. The information about these appointments of Faculty /Principal/Director, in the prescribed Format shall
be uploaded on the Web-Portal of AICTE.
--- Page 22 ---
‘yuswueBouow /uoos1\ddy 1ayndwio5
x
S ul sasinod ayonpni6 Japun Buluuns Apoasjo sUOYNpHSU] [O/UYIE|-UONY Buysixe Jo} a}qoa!\ddb jou si ajqd} eAcgD ay} UI PaMo||D axDJU! LUNLUIXOW :JION
3
z “juawe2uNOUUD yeBpng pud suoHOpUaWUWOIaI Body ||IN UO pesdg josodoid sasinod Buluud|d ##
2 O€ wWinuixoW of dn g jo sdajs ul spoas 9 fo WUNWIUIW #
8
a
ie)
3} 0€ L L 0€ OZL L & ayy) Ov VN VN VN VN
eS ## Buyuunld |Z
[om
< O9E | 9 XOW | 9 ~XOW 09 OOE | G ‘XPW | G ‘XOW 0€/09 WN VN VN VN juaweBouow | 9
OOE | S XOW | GS “XOW 0 OOE | G ‘XPW | G ‘XOW 0€/09 WN VN VN VN Sudipoyddy
9 dajnduioy |G
ABojouyre]
06 6 PQ || & ean 0€ Ost Bean || & Zein) 09 Ost CeyOW EXOW 09 BuLiap05 °»g
jusweBounw |aoy | 7
SY € xDW | & XOW SL OSL G xXOW | G “XOW oe 06 ErKOWw. € “XOW Oe uBisoq| ¢
. . a . f . SHOID'
06 € xDW | & XOW oe 06 € XPW | € *XOW oe 06 € xOW € XOW 0€ pun spy paddy] z
. . . 71/9 . KB
OSL | GS XOW | GS “XOW #0E O9€ . 9 -XOW 0€/09 O9€ . 9 -XOW 0€/09 O[OurP el,
ZL/9 XOW xOW pun BuieeulBu Ll
S]@Aa] JUSAaYIP 4 99 UDABOUd JUaJaYIP 10} PAMO]]D UOISIAIG YB S2SANOD Jo AaquINU ‘a>{D4U]
€ “LeIQPL
--- Page 23 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1.7
1.7.1
1.7.2
d. An Institution shall not commence the Courses, without the appointment of all the Faculty members and
other Staff.
Intake allowed for New Technical Institution
The promoter may apply for one or more programme(s). In case of Engineering and Technology program,
the promoter should start with a minimum of four courses out of which there should be at least THREE
CORE BRANCHES/COURSES) (including Multidisciplinary / Region Specific) and ONE course of
emerging area. However, the “maximum intake allowed” for the Programme(s)shall be as specified in
Table 1.3
The Annexure-11 of the APH provides the details regarding the nomenclature of the courses for
Diploma/Under Graduate / Post Graduate Level/Post Graduation Diploma or a combination thereof.
NOTE: One Division with Collaboration and Twinning is permissible in each Program Course(s). State/
Central Universities or Autonomous Government Institutions offering Only Post Graduate Courses in
Engineering and Technology shall be granted a MAXIMUM of 5 Courses. Any additional Course(s)
shall be granted to such Institutions based on the valid National Board of Accreditation (NBA).
The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Deficiency Report generated
through Web-Portal.
1.8 Process for Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee:
a. The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated by Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee
as per process shown in Annexure-7 of the Approval Process Handbook by selection of committee
members through a web portal based automated selection process made available by AICTE.
b. — The date and time for Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be informed by the Regulation Bureau to the
institutes and the concerned experts.
c. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or Principal/
Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by Chairman / Secretary of the trust) along
with Self-Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents before the
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.
d. — Applicants shall present their application along with original documents and self-attested copies as per
Annexure-1 of the Approval Process Handbook, before the Scrutiny Committee. Applicants shall adhere
to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain absent at the time of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.
e. Applicant shall submit online a set of attested copies of original documents to the Regulation
Bureau, produced during online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny committee. The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the
authenticity of the documents submitted by the Applicant as mentioned above and shall countersign (if
verified offline) all the documents that are accepted.
Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant through AICTE Web-Portal and institution are expected to fulfil them for
re-scrutiny committee.
g- | The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify ONLY the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny committee
as per the norms and standards and shall countersign (If verified offline) all the documents that are
accepted.
h. Applications that are found to be in order in all respect by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny shall be processed
further for EVC.
The Institutions applied for simultaneous closure & opening of new Institution shall be processed through
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ EVC. The application for Closure of the Institution shall be processed first and if
closure is recommended, then only the application shall be processed further for the establishment of new
Technical Institution following the applicable procedures specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
--- Page 24 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE: All the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions) the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in Offline
mode also. All the processing of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency and
Accountability.
1.9 Process for Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee (EVC)
a.
The Expert Visit Committee shall be constituted by selection of committee members through a web
portal based automated process made available by AICTE. The EVC shall verify physically/ online the
infrastructural facilities of the institution.
Additional experts, if required, may also be co-opted in any of the Committee for processing of
applications, Complaints, etc.
EVC shall verify Readiness with respect to Instructional, Administrative, Amenities, Laboratory
Equipment’s, relevant documents and other Essential and Desirable requirements (as defined in
Chapter VI) of the Technical Institution as per the Annexure-3 & 4 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Progress related to appointment of Principal/ Director and Faculty with respect to the norms, standards
and conditions prescribed by the Council.
They shall verify actual availability of Equipment as per the Curriculum and Syllabus of the affiliating
University/ Board and Computers, Software, Internet, Printers, Book Titles, Book Volumes, subscription of
National and International Journals and entry in the Stock Registers as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
In case of online EVC, the institution shall prepare a video showcasing all the infrastructural facilities for
not less than 30 minutes and shall upload the same in the Trust / Society website and share the link in
the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Annexure-1 of the
Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.
In case of Physical EVC, the institution shall arrange for Video recording (institution expense) with the date
and time of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit Committee. The institution shall upload the same in
the Trust / Society Website and share the link in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as
applicable) as mentioned in Annexure-1 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on
portal.
NOTE: The video recording with briefing by one of the Institute representative for not less than 30
minutes shall cover the entry and exit of the Committee with time, the Building Plan approved and signed
by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, GPS Coordinates at the entrance of the main building, academic
building, administrative building and library in addition to the recording of other details. The Institute
shall also arrange Laptop/Desktop with Internet facility, Scanner and Printer to the EVC (only in offline
mode)
The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee Report and EVC Report shall be made available to the institutions
through AICTE web portal.
1.10. Grant of Approval
a.
The Executive Committee (EC) after considering the recommendations of the Committee and views of
the Regulation Bureau shall take decision either to grant of approval or otherwise. The decisions of the
Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.
The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form of Letter of
Approval (LoA) or Letter of Deficiency (LoD)/ Letter of Rejection (LoR). Also, Speaking Order will be made
available on AICTE web portal in case of LoR with specific reasons for rejection of the application.
i. In case of the Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval that failed to admit the students in the
current Academic Year due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State
Government/ UT requirements shall submit an Affidavit for the same within 7 days from the date of
intimation for the credit of Security Deposit in AICTE bank account to the Regulation Bureau. Such
Applicantsare permittedto paythe Security DepositinthenextAcademic Yearaspertheabovedeadlines.
--- Page 25 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii. Letter of Approval (LoA)for new Technical Institutions, if issued, shall be valid for two Academic
Years from the date of issue for obtaining affiliation from the respective University/ Board and
fulfilling State Government/ UT requirements for admission in the respective Academic Year.
However, all the applications which were issued LoA for starting new Technical Institutions shall
apply for Extension of Approval (EoA) from the next Academic Year onwards, irrespective of the
admission of the students or otherwise.
NOTE: On Expiry of the Validity of Two Years, the LoA Stands Cancelled.
1. An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has passed
out, to verify the fulfillment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
2. It is the sole responsibility of the Institutions to inform the rejection of the Council to the concerned
authorities who had given the NOC for the Closure of the Institution in view of their application.
A Letter of Approval (LoA)/ Letter of Deficiency (LoD)/Letter of Rejection (LoR) with the reasons for
rejection of the application shall be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or before the last date
mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Any Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal as per
Clause 1.11 of this Chapter and the final decision of the Council shall be intimated through portal on
or before the last date mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
1.11 Appeal Procedure
a.
As per the provisions laid down in Clause1.10 of this Chapter, an Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved
by the decision of the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal (through portal) once to the
Council within 7 days from the date of issue of Letter of Deficiency (LoD).
The appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee. The appeal
schedule shall be notified | on the Web-Portal/website.
Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of Standing Appellate Committee and not toremain
absent in view of the stern time limit given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Hence, the Applicants are
instructed to be prepared with the supporting
documents in proof of the compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the Committee, even in
case of short notice.
The Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee and Expert Visit Committee (as applicable) shall be
placed along with the observations of the Regulation Bureau, before the Standing Appellate Committee on
the date and time scheduled by AICTE. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company or Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them)
along with Self- Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents
before the Standing Appellate Committee. The SAC shall either Recommend/ Not Recommend the
case to the Council or recommend for SC / EVC. Accordingly, Scrutiny /Expert Visit Committee shall
be conducted as per Clause 1.8 & 1.9 of this Chapter and the reports of the same shall be placed
before another Standing Appellate Committee inviting the representatives of the Institution along with the
compliance and supporting documents for taking a final decision as to Recommend/ Not Recommended.
The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council whose
decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
Applicants, whose applications are recommended for grant of approval by the Council, shall be informed
for submission of Security Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 as per Clause 1.12 of this Chapter.
A Letter of Approval (LoA)/Letter of Rejection (LoR) with the reasons for rejection of the application shall
--- Page 26 ---
Approval Process Handbook
be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or before the last date mentioned in the Academic
Calendar.
1.12 Security Deposit
Applicants for starting new Technical Institutions other than Government/ Government aided Institutions
whose applications are recommended for Letter of Approval (LoA) by the Executive Committee shall be
informed for the creation of Security Deposit as per APH Provisions.
i. Existing Institutions applied under Clause 1.3.3 and in existence for more than 5 years with the
respective Regulatory Bodies are exempted from the payment of Security Deposit.
ii. Applicants, whose applications under Clause 1.5.2 are recommended for starting new Technical
Institutions shall create the Security Deposit for the balance amount of the Security.
iii Deposit created earlier, as per the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook for the remaining
period of 10 years, as applicable. No deposit is required where NOC was already issued to the
Institution for the release of the earlier FDR.
Table 1.4 Security Deposit (in Lakh) applicable for Institutions under Different Programme(s)
1 Engineering and Technology 15 iS) 15
2 Planning 15 15 15
3) Applied Arts and Crafts 15 15 15
4 Design 15 15 15
5 Le and Catering 15 15 15
6 Computer Applications (viz.BCA, - 5 15
MCA, etc.)
7 Management (viz. BBA, MBA, etc.) - S) 15
Note: The Security Deposit amount shall be DOUBLE in case of private leased building /
land.
iv. The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years. The
interest accumulated on the deposit shall be retained and utilized by the Council for Institutional
Development activities, Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships to students,
etc.
v. The Principal amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the term.
However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as shall be
decided on a case to case basis and/ or forfeited in case of any violation of norms, conditions, and
requirements/ Non-Performance by the Institution/ Complaints against the Institution.
aaa werted we fea: aA |
Te ATMS: We BITHAT A
System for generation/transmission of power through motion or continuous rotation
of shafts, wheels or wedges is called a machine.
10
--- Page 27 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-II
Grant of Extension of Approval for Existing Institutions
Grant of ‘Extension of Approval (EoA)’ for Existing Institutions for the following:
vi.
vii.
viii.
xi.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
XV.
xvi.
xvii.
Extension of Approval (EoA) based on Self-Disclosure
ncrease in Intake/ Additional Course(s).
To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions.
ntroduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s).
ntroduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India
OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
ntroduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course
ntroduction of Off-Campus
ntroduction/Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management
Merger of Institutions under the same/ different Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus or City
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding Academic Year (s) /
Hibernation/Restoration of Intake
Change of Site/ Location
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)
Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/ Board orType of Institution (Institution(s)
converted into a University)
Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
Closure of the Institution.
2.1 Introduction
a.
Existing institutions shall be eligible for getting 3 years’ Extension of Approval (EoA) from the AY-2024-25
by remitting 3 years’ TER Charges (Table 2.1) by meeting ANYONE of the following criteria:
Figured in 8th Edition of NIRF ranked Institutions (announcement made on 5th June 2023).
Figured in QS World Ranking Asia-2024 (announcement made on 8th Nov 2023).
Institutions having minimum of 30% eligible courses with NBA accreditation having validity till 30th April
2025. (The institutions should continue to get accreditation of their programs)
Institutions with valid NAAC score of 3.01 and above on scale of 4.0.
--- Page 28 ---
Approval Process Handbook
v. Institutions having conferred ‘Autonomous Status’ by UGC/Autonomy by AICTE.
vi. Institutions having more than 80% admission consecutively for last 5 Academic Years.
Note: Although, the institutions can get extended EoA for 3 years, annually they need to submit
information/data during the AICTE Approval Process time of respective years.
b. Institution offering Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall not admit students without prior approval of
the Council.
c. Every Institution offering Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall submit an application through AICTE
web portal to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of Course(s).
d. The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in this Approval
Process Handbook. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central, State and Local Laws
and norms of other Regulatory Body, if applicable.
e. In case of Institutions having Lease agreement for Land, the Council shall not issue EoA from the Year
in which the Live Lease is equal to the number of years of the Course having the maximum duration.
However, if such Institutions submit the Lease extended for a further 30 years, application shall be
considered for EoA.
2.2. Time Schedule for Processing of Applications
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE Website from
time to time inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and processing thereof. The
time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice / AICTE Website shall be final and binding. To process
any request from the Institutions regarding approval, online application is mandatory. Applications
submitted offline shall NOT be considered.
b. — The submission of an application on the AICTE Web-Portal and payment of TER Charges shall not be later
than the last date as notified in the Public Notice / AICTE Website from time to time.
2.3. Submission of Application for Extension of Approval
2.3.1 Submission of Application
a. The existing Institutions using their Login credentials shall enter/ edit data as required and shall submit
the application in the prescribed Format on AICTE Web-Portal. A unique identification number is allotted
to each application for further reference and to track the status of the application at various stages of
processing.
b. If any existing Institution has forgotten the Password, the Institution shall apply online for a new password.
Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of Rs.6000/- (Rupees Six Thousand Only) shall be made
through the payment gateway on the AICTE Web-Portal. The proof of payment and an Affidavit 1 for
“Forgotten Password” shall be Uploaded on the portal for allotment of new Password to the Applicants
after verification.
NOTE: ALL Standalone PGDM/PGCM institutions who have NOT uploaded full details of all the
students since inception of the program on AICTE web portal despite continuous correspondence since
AY 2018 -19 shall NOT be allowed to apply for any of the categories mentioned above.
2.3.2 Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. TER Charges in Rs. Lakh for various applications of (Diploma / Post Diploma / Under Graduate Degree
/ Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree/ Fellow Programme in management Institutions are
given below:
12
--- Page 29 ---
Approval Process Handboo
“arO4U] Palddy au jo Ajeaydedses sasinoD pun suoisiaiq jo dequinu
BU} JO} POJ@PISUOD OAD S}O9S SOIHUNOD }[ND OY} Ul S194JOM UDIPU] JO USPIIYD / NJ / [DO JO UoYDNUYUOD puDd BANSO|ISIG-4|2S UO pasDg YOR 40} seBioyd yIL
ayy jo seBiew /(s)asinod ayy yo SWON ayy Ul eBUDYD
/|PA27] PWO|dIq OU! jaAe7 9e16aq jo UOIsIaAUOD
(suoynyysuy
AUOUIW ° PEplYy
09°0 SZL ose ACO REL IRO| UI}
SUOKNYSU]
JOULO [IV
ALISIOAIUF]
q q . 4045 /MISOALUl]
OL'O SLO S70 jouyuasy /
JUBWIUI9AO,
Ald /saduuos euips ayy ul Buljosedo
(sjesinop | Aupdwod = /AjalD0g/ snap juaayIG
Aundwos | 9ai6q jong/peyosBayuy jo uopnpoyul /,,paMol|y | /ewiOs ay} JapUuN sUOYM{YsU Jo JeB1e;W Fourie
/ Aye1D0g / SNAIL JO sSeippD /(AJISIAAIU] D OJ! PEP@AUOD | eyDjU) WUNWUIXOW ,,BUIPN|U! (s)esiNncd JOUOYIPpD | /AUDdWOD /AjeID0g / JsN4] a4} JO SWON " - |
(s)UoHNysu})UOHNyYSsUy adAl JO ,pupog/Ajisianiur) | aYD{U] Ul asDeIDU{/s}OaS JYN $O UOHONUUOD | ay ul aBuDYD /suoKNyysU) Buysixe ayy a
DIYJO /UOHMUYSU] BY} JO SLUDKY a4 UI @BUDYD/(s)asiNoD | 40 —UOIDNpoU) —/OSI9A-9DIA PUD UONJNJYSU] | UL JaA@T/ EWLUDIBOIg MAN YIDe HDs of L
/(S) AuUUDsB01g JO aANSO|D/axO4U] UI UOINpPay /sasiNOD | pe-oD OJUIUOHNJYSU] S,UAWOAA }$O UOISIaAUOD | / [ede] 9e16aq OjUI jae] DWO\dIG jo
uolsiaAUoD / UO}}O07/a}Is_ jo aBuDYy>
JUYI2IL “LZ AGEL
(suoynyysuy
AMOUIW °g Paply
SaL oe0 00'9 os’% 4 ovo 020 “Moo Buipnjaut
SUOWNNSU|
AOULO IV
sAISI@AIU BIOS
0s'0 s0'0 0s'0 0s'0 SZ'0 Slo S00 /MISI@AIU] JOHUED
/$USWIUIAAOD
SSDISD) AE snduio5-. ‘sjDas uolssiuidng | sesined vaw VER ce
SES “ soli moe nal jucHPPeA | /WdOd SammpTo,
juaweBbouny SOLUNOD }]ND ae ior 9 ees 404 dv
ut ouput ES) lon upipu uoneuoiee Aouad UOISIAIG 184 UOILAISU
mo|je4 jo JO US’PIIYD /W°4 jo odAL
Jo uowsnpo1ju| uaspIIYD/Nd /IDO (Na 190 “HAPS
) AINSO|ISIG-}]8S UO PasDg |DAOJddy Jo UOIsUAa4x:
uoypauyues uoySNposyUy [FSIGRIES US (FESS) | VETONUG! 4
13
--- Page 30 ---
Approval Process Handbook
# NO TER Charges shall be levied for Postgraduate Degree Courses (other than MCA and
Management) and institutions applying under hibernation Clause.
* NO TER Charges shall be levied, if the State Government / UT changes the jurisdiction of the
affiliating University and if the nomenclature of course is not available in the University for Course
Name Change.
** Only affiliating institutions are eligible .
NOTE i. TER charges will increase @ 10% annually.
ii. Above TER Charges (other than EoA based on Self-Disclosure and Continuation of OCI/ FN/
Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries seats) are applicable irrespective of number
of Divisions / Courses.
iii. TER Charges shall NOT be refunded in any case, ifthe application is processed and rejected as
specified in this Approval Process Handbook.
iv. TER Charges for Change in the Bank Details is Rs. 6000/- (Rupees Six Thousand) only.
b. If any additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing Hearing Committee/Standing Appellate
Committee has to be conducted online/offline (including the Court directions) for any type of Institutions,
then the Applicant has to remit Rs. 0.60 Lakh (Rs. 0.15 Lakh for Government) through online as an
additional TER Charges.
c. If any additional Expert Visit Committee has to be conducted (Online/Physical) (inclusive of the Court
directions) to any type of Institution, the Applicant has to remit Rs.1.25Lakh for online EVC and
Rs. 2.50 Lakh for Physical EVC (for Government Rs. 0.25 Lakh & 0.50 lakh respectively) as an
additional TER Charges.
d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal within the
deadline, failing which, the application shall not be considered for processing.
e. Applications submitted under Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree
Level & vice-versa / To start new Programme / Level in the existing Institutions / Merger of Institutions
(under the same/ different Trust / Society / Company operating in the same Campus or City), if rejected at the
Level of Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision, the TER Charges after a deduction
of Rs.0.60 lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.
2.3.3 Data entry, deficiency report and reopening of the submitted applications.
a. All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered / edited are correct. Facility to edit the data
is available until the final submission of the online application.
b. — AICTE Web-Portal allows the generation of Deficiency Report for the online submitted applications.
c. After the final submission of the application, the data entered shall NOT be allowed for any further
editing, till the processing of application is completed. Hence, the Applicants shall exercise utmost
caution before submitting the application.
d. — If an Institution has wrongly submitted an application, the same shall be represented to AICTE,
Heaquarters along with the Resolution of the Trust / Society / Company (Director/Principal/Authorized
person in case of Government institutions), duly signed by the Chairperson / Secretary to that effect in the
Format 3, within the last date as notified in the Public Notice for Approval process /AICTE Web-Portal.
e. The application shall be reopened ONE TIME to enable the Institution to rectify the same and resume
it with necessary TER Charges along with the Penalty for Late Submission (as applicable), with the
approval of Competent Authority.
--- Page 31 ---
Approval Process Handbook
After the submission of the application along with TER charges, if an institution intends to revoke the
application for a specific purpose (other than Extension of Approval), the same shall be represented
by the Institution to AICTE, along with the Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company, duly signed by the
Chairman/ Secretary to that effect in the Format 3, at least within 7 days from the last date as notified in
the Public Notice / AICTE Website. Then TER Charges after a deduction of Rs. 0.25 Lakh/-shall be
refunded to the Applicant and if the Closure of the Course(s)/Programme(s)/Institution is revoked as per
the approval of the Council, the necessary TER Charges for Extension of Approval along with the Penalty
for Late Submission, as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall be paid.
If an Institution intends to withdraw the application submitted for Closure of the Institution /
Programme(s) / Course(s) which is pending (for non-submission of documents), the same shall be
revoked on or before 10th April of the Calendar Year. In case, the Closure of the Institution/
Programme(s) / Course(s) is revoked, the necessary TER Charges for extension of approval alongwith the
penalty for late submission, as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall be paid.
2.3.4 Documents and Affidavit to be uploaded on portal & Processing of application
a.
All Institutions shall upload the documents (Digitally Signed using DSC) as per Annexure-2 of the
Approval Process Handbook on AICTE Web-Portal. Hard Copies of the Application/ Additional
Documents NEED NOT be submitted to the AICTE, HQ.
An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public Notary or an Oath Commissioner on
Rs.100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper / e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed & uploaded on AICTE web
portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the, civil and/or criminal provisions as per the
Regulations in place.
All the submitted applications along with TER charges (other than Extension of
Approval) based on self-disclosure shall be processed as per the norms and procedures
specified in the Approval Process Handbook by the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee/ EVC
(if applicable) strictly based on the documents uploaded on AICTE portal.
The institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central, State and Local Laws wherever
applicable.
Extension of Approval will not be issued, if any Law Enforcing Agencies of Central /State Government
prohibit AICTE to issue any order.
2.3.5 Expert Visit Committee (Inspection)
2.4
2.5
a.
Institutions at random shall be subject to EVC (Inspection) for the fulfillment of the norms of the
Approval Process Handbook.
If any document submitted is found to be fraudulent, criminal case shall be filed against the Director/
Principal of the Institution and Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/Company.
The Institution shall be given an opportunity to submit the compliance of deficiencies (if any), before the
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, Hearing Committee to fulfil the criteria of “Nil Deficiency” based on
Self- Disclosure, for processing the application, as applicable.
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
a.
The Council shall grant Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure of the availability of the
required facilities and Infrastructure as submitted online on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org
ensuring the fulfillment of all the norms and standards as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be submitted/uploaded for
obtaining approval.
The Council shall monitor for the fulfilment of all norms by the Institution and in the event of Non-
Fulfilment, the Council shall initiate penal action as per the Regulations.
15
--- Page 32 ---
2.6
Approval Process Handbook
d. In case of The Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval but failed to admit the students due to
Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State Government/UT requirements, the
deficiency/ requirement of Faculty and infrastructural facilities shall be calculated from the year of the
admission of the students.
Increase in Intake / Additional Course(s)
As envisaged in the provisions laid down in National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the Nation's proactive
initiatives towards enhancement of Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER), the Council proposes to remove the upper
limit on intake allowed for the Courses / Programs offered by existing institutions Earlier. This is subject to the
fulfillment of infrastructure availability, its readiness and filled faculty position. Before grant of approval to the
increase in intake sought by the institution, the council shall ascertain the infrastructure and faculty availability
through an EVC.
Also, NEP 2020 envisages the availability of Higher Technical Education in Indian Languages at Diploma/
Degree level as well as to impart education in mother tongue so as to enhance the creativity, critical
thinking among the students. In alignment with the provisions of NEP 2020, AICTE has initiated Technical Book
Writing scheme in 12 languages viz Hindi, Tamil, Gujarati, Kannada, Marathi, Bengali, Telugu, Punjabi, Odia,
Assamese, Malayalam & Urdu. The books in Indian language are available for free download at https://
ekumbh.aicte-india.org and the institutes are encouraged to use these books as _ text/ reference books. AICTE
shall permit an addition of ONE division with 30/60 seats (as supernumerary) in Indian/Regional language
against to the eligible and interested institutes.
a. The existing Institutions shall have liberty to expand its activities by increase intake/ Addition of
new/ additional Course(s). The increase in intake demanded by the institutions shall be approved in
commensuration with equivalent infrastructure, facilities and faculty.
b. Institutions shall be eligible for new Course(s) / expansion of existing Course(s) subject to the following
conditions:
i. Infrastructure facilities shall be as per norms mentioned in this APH.
ii. Faculty required shall be as per the FSR defined in this APH.
iii. Submission of additional documents as mentioned in this APH.
c. Increase in intake / Additional Course in Diploma / Under Graduate /Post Graduate level in
Engineering and Technology shall be permissible, if the Institution is already offering minimum
three (3) courses in Core Branches including Multidisciplinary/Region Specific branches (as listed in
Annexure-2 (Not applicable for Regional Language Courses).
d. Building Plan for the entire duration for all Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s) of the
Institution shall be prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor.
However, Infrastructure requirements for the First Year should be completed in all aspects.
Institution shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Common
facilities shall cater the need of the total “Approved Intake” with total Built-up area equal to the sum total
of the area requirement of each Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s).
e. No increase in the Intake shall be given to Institutions where inquiries are pending against the Institution
by any Central/State investigating agencies.
f. Institution getting approval for new Course(s) in a particular Academic Year shall also be considered for
grant of NRI/ OCI/ FN/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries, subject to fulfilment of norms
of the Approval Process Handbook.
g. Reduction in “Core Branches” (Like Agriculture Engineering, Automobile Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Electrical and Electronics
Engineering, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunica tion
Engineering, Food Technology, Industrial Engineering, Electronics Instrumentation, Mechanical
Engineering, Metallurgy, Mining Engineering and Textile Engineering, etc.,(Refer Annexure -11) shall be
allowed to a maximum of 50% of previously “Approved Intake” (Not less than 30).
h. | New Post Graduate Degree Course(s) in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary areas under Engineering and
Technology shall be permitted and Existing Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology shall
16
--- Page 33 ---
Approval Process Handbook
be permitted to convert into courses in Emerging/Multidisciplinary Areas as specified in Annexure-11
of the Approval Process Handbook.
i. The Institutions offering the Courses in Applied Arts and Crafts, Design, Planning and Hotel Management
and Catering Technology shall be eligible to apply for new Course(s) at the Post Graduate Level as
specified in Annexure-11 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted for any increase in intake in existing courses or new courses.
Also, EVC shall be conducted, any time before the first batch of students passed out (including new
course) or within the duration of the course in case of new courses approved to verify the fulfilment
of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
k. Introduction / Continuation of specialized courses like MBA/PGDM #(IEV) will be processed as per the
provisions mentioned in Annexure-9.
The Institutions offering the Courses in Engineering and Technology, Management, Applied Arts and
Crafts, Design, Planning, and Hotel Management & Catering Technology shall be eligible for an
additional ONE division with 15/30/60 seats (as supernumerary) in each course at all levels to the
interested institutions exclusively for Working Professionals meeting any one of the following criteria:
i. Institutions having more than 80% average enrollment in last 3 years.
ii. Institutions operating in Aspirational Districts (as per the latest list notified by NITI Aayog).
iii. Institutions belonging to Jammu, Kashmir and Leh Ladakh, NER States.
NOTE: 1. Guidelines notified by AICTE from time to time shall be adopted by the Institutions
having approval under this Clause (2.6 (i)) for effecting admissions to the Working
Professionals.
2. Affiliation with two different Universities for the same Technical programme/Courses
shall NOT be permitted. However, Institutions offering Technical Courses in Computer
Applications (Viz. MCA/BCA) and Management (Viz. MBA/MMS/BBA/BMS, etc.) are ONLY
permitted to have Affiliation with different Universities.
3. It is the sole responsibility of the institution to obtain NOC from the Affiliating University
& State Government (if applicable) before starting of the Academic Session.
2.7. To Start New Programme(s) / Level in the Existing Institutions
a. The existing Institutions seeking approval to start new Programme’s/ Level shall apply on AICTE Web
Portal along with the Extension of Approval for the existing Programme(s) and Course(s) with the
dditional documents as per Annexure- 2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Q
b. The Institutions applying under Break in EoA /Restoration of intake /Hibernation are also eligible
to apply.
The Institutions applying under this category are also eligible to apply for other categories listed under
Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook including Extension of Approval/ Continuation of NRI/
supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers
in Gulf Countries for the existing Course(s).
d. The Institution may apply for multiple Programmes and respective levels.
e. To start new Courses under new Programmme shall be processed as per Clause 2.6 of this APH.
f. The Constituent Colleges of State/Central Universities shall be permitted to start Post Graduate Level
Courses in Engineering & Technology without corresponding/ allied Under Graduate Level Courses.
Institutions can offer PG Planning Course without Corresponding UG Course.
g. Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be prepared by an
Architect registered with the Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor and shall be approved by
17
--- Page 34 ---
Approval Process Handbook
the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State Government/ UT. However, infrastructure
requirements for the First Year should be completed in all aspects. Institution shall maintain Faculty:
Student ratio as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Common facilities shall cater the need of
the total “Approved Intake”.
h. Institute should have sufficient built up area to cover all the requirements of ALL the program(s)/levels
conducted as per the provisions of Approval Process Handbook.
i. Although AICTE does permit sharing of resources, the institute shall provide ample space for play-ground
(owned or hired) facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or through
arrangements with other adjacent Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.
i- The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms) corresponding to the
Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.
k. The Institution may also seek to change the Name of the Institution.
I. If the application for the new Programme/Level is not approved, EoA for the Institution shall be issued.
However, the institution shall fulfil all the requirements as per APH for the issue of EOA.
2.8 Approval for Introduction/ Continuation of Seats for Non-Resident Indian(s)
a. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Non-Resident Indian(s) shall apply on
AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents/certificates as per Annexure-2 of the Approval
Process Handbook. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Report
generated.
b. Five percent (5%) of seats within the “Approved Intake” shall be allowed for admission under NRI
category.
c. Competent Authority for admission shall be the same as for regular admission and shall fetch a
list of Technical Institutions who have sought approval from the Council.
d. | The Competent Authority for admission shall display the availability of NRI seats, course/ branch wise, in
various Institutions, for information of candidates during all stages of admission so that the students can
freely exercise their informed choice. Also, Competent Authority for admission shall prepare a merit list
of Applicants by inviting applications from eligible NRI students and admit strictly on merit basis. In the
event of non-availability of students in NRI seats, the seats shall be given to general candidates as per
merit. However, regular Fee shall be applicable to these candidates who have admitted against vacant
NRI seats.
e. A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each beneficiary.
Students seeking change of branches/courses shall be allowed to do so only in the branches where NRI
seats are vacant.
te The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates to be
admitted under NRI seats.
g. The Institutions shall publish on their Brochure and Web site, the number of NRI seats available in the
Course(s) / Division(s) for information to the students and other stake holders.
2.9 Introduction/Continuation of Supernumerary Seats for Foreign Nationals/Overseas Citizen of India
(OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries.
Fifteen percent (15%) supernumerary seats over and above the “Approved Intake” per Course shall be
approved for AICTE approved Institutions and University Departments, for admitting students from
Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries. One
third (1/3) of these 15% seats shall be reserved for the Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.
The existing Institution having at least 80% (Avg) enrollment in last three years are eligible for Introduction
of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers
18
--- Page 35 ---
Approval Process Handbook
in Gulf Countries. The Institution shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per
Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on
Self-Disclosure.
a.
Institutions selected for Study in India Programme by the Government of India are eligible for
introduction of FN/OCI/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries in ALL Programmes/ Courses
without Expert Visit Committee BUT with applicable TER charges.
If the Institution is providing Fee waiver to the selected students as per their commitment to
the Government, the TER Charges for continuation of supernumerary seats for FN/OCI/
Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall be waived. However, the Institution shall upload
on AICTE Web portal the selection letter for Study in India Programme and the document of the
Fee waiver provided to the students.
The Institutions shall provide suitable Hostel/ Residential accommodation to the Foreign Students/
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) and Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries. Further the Institutions
shall also establish an Office with a Student Counselor to take care of the needs of the students admitted.
An Induction Programme shall be arranged for such students to get acquainted to the Indian condition.
Any vacant seat in a given Course, out of 1/3rd seats reserved for Children of Indian Workers in the
Gulf Countries shall be reverted to the seats of 2/3rd meant for OCI/ Foreign Nationals and vice-versa.
Further, any vacant seat in the “Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian
Workers in Gulf Countries” after the last round of the admission of the concerned State Government/
UT may be filled with NRI seats, subject to the approval from AICTE for the NRI seats and fulfillment of
requisite norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
NRI/ Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries seats are not allowed to be filled by Indian Citizens.
Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) /Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries admitted in AICTE approved Institutions through Indian Council for Cultural Relation (ICCR) or as
Government of India nominee shall be included within this ceiling
The Institution shall submit online application MANDATORILY FOR EACH COURSE (if interested) for
Continuation of approval for supernumerary seats for admitting Foreign National/ Overseas Citizen
of India (OCI) / Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries, as a part of application of Extension of
Approval, every year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.
If any punitive action is enforced on an Institution, NRI/ OCI Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries seats shall be withdrawn.
Institutions admitting Foreign Nationals should ensure registration of foreign students with
concerned Foreigners Regional Registration Officer (FRRO) as well as with the local police
station about their entry and exit from India. Further the Institutions shall adhere to the
prevalent norms specified by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India from time to time.
The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates admitted
under Foreign Nationals/ OCI seats.
Admission to these seats shall be made on merit basis among Applicants of these categories by the
State Admission Authorities.
2.10 Introduction of Integrated / Dual Degree Course
In respect of Integrated / Dual Degree Course(s), UGC norms shall be applicable, as per
Section 4 of PART Ill of UGC Gazette Notification, 2014 and amended from time to time.
19
--- Page 36 ---
Approval Process Handbook
i. Five Years Integrated Degree in Engineering and Technology leading to Master of Technology
(M.Tech.), Nomenclature shall be as per Major Disciplines of Engineering and Technology given in
Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
ii. Five Years Integrated Degree in Planning leading to Master of Planning.
iii. FOUR Years Integrated Degree in Computer Applications leading to Master of Computer
Application.
iv. FOUR Years Integrated Degree in Management leading to Master of Business Administration
(MBA).
v. Five years Integrated Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology leads to a Master in
Hotel Management and Catering Technology.
b. The existing Institutions where Course(s) in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/ Hotel Management
and Catering Technology/ MCA/ Management Programme are already in existence shall be eligible to
apply for approval of respective Integrated Degree Programme.
c. Approval shall be considered only to those Institutions where there is “Nil Deficiency” based on
Self-Disclosure.
d. — Applicants shall upload relevant documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook on
AICTE Web portal.
NOTE: It is the sole responsibility of the institution to obtain NOC from the Affiliating University &
State Government (if applicable) before effecting admission.
2.11 Introduction of Off-Campus
The existing affiliating Institutions only shall be permitted to introduce Off-Campus on the similar lines of
Constituent Colleges of State/Central Universities within the Jurisdiction of affiliating University.
a. The Institutions which are existence for at least Ten (10) years and meeting any of the
following Criteria shall be permitted to introduce ONE (1) Off-Campus within the Jurisdiction of affiliating
University/ same City:
i. Institutions figured in 8th Edition of NIRF ranking (announcement made on 5th June 2023).
ii. Institutions figured in QS World Ranking Asia-2024 (announcement made on 8th Nov 2023).
iii. Institutions having minimum of 50% eligible courses with NBA accreditation having validity till 30th
April 2025.
iv. Institutions with valid NAAC score of 3.01 and above on scale of 4.0.
v. Institutions having conferred ‘Autonomous Status’ by UGC/Autonomy by AICTE.
vi. Institutions having more than 80% admission consecutively for last 5 Academic Years.
b. The existing Institution seeking approval for Introduction of Off-Campus shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal
with the same PID.
c. All. the infrastructure facilities required for running all the Programmes/Courses to be
offered in the Off-Campus shall be as per the Norms defined in Annexure-3 of this APH.
d. The Institution can apply for multiple Programmes/Courses in the Off-Campus.
e. The application submitted under this clause shall be processed similar to the New Institution application.
f. There should NOT be any movement of students between Main and Off-campus of the Institute.
NOTE 1. It is the sole responsibility of the institution to obtain NOC from the Affiliating University & State
Government (if applicable) before effecting admission in the Off-Campus.
2. Affiliating University Jurisdiction is NOT applicable for PGDM/PGCM Institutions.
20
--- Page 37 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.12 Introduction/Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management (FPM)
a. The approval shall be granted for the complete duration of the Fellow Programme in Management.
b. The minimum duration of the Course shall be 3 years, but shall not exceed 5 years. However, in
exceptional circumstances beyond 5 years, the student shall have to re-register and has to complete
within the extended period of 2 years.
c. Institutions where Course(s) in Management Programme (MBA/MMS/PGDM) are already in existence
shall be eligible to apply for approval of Fellow Programme in Management.
d. The existing Institution seeking approval for Introduction of Fellow Programme in Management shall
apply on AICTE Web-Portal and shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.
e. Since inception, the Institution should have been free from serious Complaints against Ragging, Non
Payment of dues to Council and other punitive actions and investigation by Central /State Agencies.
f. The Institution should have the required number of Full Time Faculty members as per AICTE norms for
offering Fellow Programme in MBA/ MMS/ PGDM Programme.
g. The Institutions should have at least 50% of the Full Time Faculty members with Ph.D./ Fellow from
AICTE approved Institutions/ CFTls/Reputed Universities, if the Institution applies for 20 seats and 25% if
institution applies for 10 seats. These Faculty members should have at least two papers published in
Scopus/Web of Science Journals in the last 3 years. Each Professor and Associate Professor shall not
guide more than SIX and FOUR research scholars respectively at a time.
h. The Institution should have subscribed Journals in Business Management area of Organizational
Behavior/ Human Resource, Finance and Accounts, Marketing, Operations, IT Systems, Economics,
etc.
i. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Fellow Programme shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Annexure-2 of the
Approval Process Handbook submitted for Introduction of Fellow Programme in Management and for
Continuation of approval for Fellow Programme in Management the institution shall submit an application
as a part of application for Extension of Approval, every year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.
k. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the SC/Re-SC /EVC, the Institution shall have the right to
appeal as per Clause 2.24 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Student's eligibility, procedure for admission and conduct of the Programme shall be as per details given
in Annexure-8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.13 Merger of Institutions under the same / different Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus or City
In view of National Education Policy 2020, to encourage multidisciplinary approach in Higher Technical
Education, the merger of Institutions shall be permitted within city limits.
i. Parent Institution - An Institution where prospective administration and learning takes place
after the Merger.
ii. Child Institution(s) - Institution(s) from which the Courses are to be shifted to the Parent Institution
and cease to exist upon approval of merger of the Institutions.
2.13.1 Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company
a. The existing Institutions of the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same location/ city shall
be permitted to merge into a single Institution with all the facilities at the proposed Parent Institution and/
21
--- Page 38 ---
Approval Process Handbook
or part/ full facilities of the Child Institution(s), if necessary.
If all the required facilities are available exclusively in the Parent Institution (without depending on the
facilities of the Child Institution(s)), as the Child Institution(s) shall be considered for Complete Closure.
However, the convenience/ approachability of all stakeholders of the Child Institution(s) to the Site/
Location of the Parent Institution shall also be taken care of by the Institutions (including commutation).
NOTE: Intra-Day movement of Students and Faculty not Allowed under any circumstances (in case
of infrastructure & other facilities required by Parent institution after merger are in multiple
locations). Institutions going for such merger shall duly inform all the stake holders regarding
schedule of conduct of Programs / Courses prior to admission
The Institution shall retain the Parent Institution’s PID and may seek changes in the Name of the
Institution.
The total Built-Up area requirement and other facilities required for the entire duration of all the
Programmes /Courses shall be fulfilled in all respects and shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
All or selected Courses of Child Institution(s) shall be merged with the Parent Institution. However, the rest
of the AICTE approved Courses, if any, in the Child Institution(s) shall be considered as closed and due
procedure for closure of the same shall be followed.
The Parent Institution shall have all infrastructure and other facilities to run ALL the Courses for the entire
duration of both Parent and Child Institution(s). However, the facilities of the child institutions can continue
to be used if required.
If Merger of Institutions is approved, the (Child) Institutions that are merged with the (Parent)
Institutions are considered as cease to exist and the liabilities, if any, arise out of this merger for
the Child Institution(s), shall solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/ Parent Institution ONLY.
In case of Merger of Institutions is approved, eligible refund/ additional TER Charges may be
refunded/ collected, as applicable.
In case, merger of institutions is rejected, refund of TER charges shall be applicable as per
Clause 1.4.2. (g).
The child Institutions shall be allowed to submit their application for EoA with or without changes /closure
of institution along with the additional documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
However, the norms of the concerned Regulatory Authorities shall also be fulfilled.
If the application for merger of Institutions is NOT approved, EoA of the individual Institutions shall be
issued.
Affidavit 2 shall be submitted to the effect that the Built-up area remain the same before/ after the
merger of the Institutions and shall not be utilized for other purposes.
If anyone of the Institution is Women’s Institution, then the application shall be processed first for the
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution by Scrutiny/ Re- Scrutiny Committee, if found
in order, then only the application shall be processed further for Merger of Institutions following the
respective procedure specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
“Approved Intake” for the Courses of the Institution after the merger shall be combined intake of parent
and child institutions.
The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms) corresponding to
the Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.
The Council reserves its right to reject the application for merger of Institutions under the same Trust/
Society/ Company operating in the same Campus, if it finds the reasons given are not justified or
Commercial or Business angle is suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.
22
--- Page 39 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE: It shall be the responsibility of the Promoter to take approval from the other Regulatory Bodies/
NOC from the Affiliating University & State Government (if applicable) before effecting
admission, in view of merger of the Institutions.
2.13.2 Merger of Institutions under the different Trust/ Society/ Company
Institutions under different Trust/Society /Company shall be permitted for merger, provided, if the
prevailing Rules applicable to Trust/Society/Company allows such merger legally. All the conditions
mentioned above under section 2.13.1 shall be applicable for merger of Institutions under the different
Trust/Society/Company.
2.14 Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and Vice-Versa
a. The existing Institutions shall be eligible for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and vice-versa
in the same Specialization within the Programme only.
b. — Only the Institutions which are in existence for a minimum period of 5 years are eligible.
c. The existing Institutions applying for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and vice-versa
in any Programme shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure of all the existing Courses
including Post Graduate Course(s) in the corresponding discipline, if any.
d. The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and
vice-versa shall be as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
e. The existing Institution seeking approval for Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice- versa shall
pply for the Course(s) corresponding to the existing one as per Annexure-11 of the Approval Process
Hand book (as applicable) on AICTE Web- Portal as per the norms.
Q
f. The Conversion shall be permitted for all the Courses in the said Level, however, Partial conversion
of few Courses in the said Level is not permissible. In case, closest available nomenclature does not
exist in Annexure-11 of the Approval Process Handbook, then such Course(s) shall be permitted for
Conversion in core branch or may close the course.
g. _ The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution.
h. It shall be necessary to provide adequate Infrastructural facilities as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook to conduct all Programme (s) and Course(s).
i. The Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa shall be affected only after the
grant of approval by the Council and the intake shall be fixed as that of the “Approved Intake” of the
Courses.
If the application for Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa is not approved, EoA
to the Institution shall be issued. However, the institution shall fulfil all the requirements as per APH for the
issue of EoA.
k. Applications for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa, rejected by Council
shall be processed for the Closure of the Programme/lInstitution (as applicable)/ Extension of Approval,
as per the choice mentioned in the application following the procedure specified in Chapter Il of the
Approval Process Handbook. However, it is the responsibility of the Institutions to inform the rejection of
application by the Council to the concerned authorities who had given the NOC for the Closure of the
Institution in view of their application.
NOTE: Refund of Security Deposit in excess shall NOT be allowed for Institutions applying for the
Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level. In case of applications seeking vice-versa, the
norms (including security deposit) as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall have to
be fulfilled.
23
--- Page 40 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.15 Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and Vice-Versa
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-Ed
Institution and vice-versa shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension of Approval as per
the norms.
b. The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-Ed
Institution and vice-versa shall be as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook
c. The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution.
d. All the exclusive facilities for Women Only Institution shall be maintained (in case conversion is from
Co-Ed to Women).
e. If the application for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa is not
approved, EoA to the Institution shall be issued.
f. The Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa shall be effected only after
the grant of approval by the Council.
2.16 Extension of Approval of the Existing Institutions after a Break in the Preceding Academic Year(s) or
Approval after Hybernation/ Restoration of Intake
2.16.1 Restoration of Intake under Break in EoA
a The Institution seeking approval after Break in EoA (break in obtaining extension of approval by an
institution on their own in the previous year(s)) shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the
documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Institution not
applied for EoA for SIX (06) years consecutively shall not be eligible to apply under Break in EoA and such
Institutions shall apply as a New Technical Institution after following appropriate procedure for Closure of the
Programmes/ Courses approved.
b The Institution(s) applying under this category shall be permitted to apply for other categories listed under
Chapter II/ Ill/ V of this Approval Process Handbook.
c Institutions not applied for Extension of Approval in the preceding Academic Years shall be
considered as “Break-in-EoA’ and shall be processed for Extension of Approval upon verification of adequate
Infrastructural facilities as specified in the Approval Process Handbook by an Expert Visit Committee.
d Hibernation: Institutions looking forward to revamp/restructure its business and not in a position to take
approval from the Council can apply under this clause prior to avail hibernation.
i. Period of Hibernation will be one year less than the maximum period of the course/level
run by the institution (example institution running UG level Courses in Engineering and
Technology will have three years Hibernation period and Institution with PG level Courses
in management will have one year hibernation period).
ii. Procedure of approval after hibernation period: The Institute has to apply before the
expiry (or) immediately after the hibernation period and submit its financial viability. EVC
shall be conducted for checking infrastructure and other facilities as per AICTE Norms.
In case the Institute have all the required infrastructure, they will also be permitted to
apply for other changes (as per Chapter II and III).
2.16.2 Restoration of Intake after Punitive Action
a The Institution seeking approval for Restoration of Intake as a result of earlier punitive/penal action
by AICTE shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the documents as per Annexure-2 of the
Approval Process Handbook. However, Institution not applied for Restoration within next Academic Year
shall be considered that penal action is accepted by the Institution and willing to continue with the same
24
--- Page 41 ---
Approval Process Handbook
reduced intake as “Approved Intake”. Institution under “NO ADMISSION” may apply for restoration in
the next Academic Year and before completion of SIX (06) years. Thereafter, such institution shall apply
as a New Technical Institution following appropriate procedure.
b The Institution(s) applying under this category shall be permitted to apply for other categories listed under
Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.17 Change of Site/Location
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for the Change of Site / Location shall apply on AICTE Web
Portal with additional documents (as applicable as per Annexure-2 of this APH) along with the Extension
of Approval as per the Norms.
b. The Change of Site / Location shall be allowed within the jurisdiction of the current affiliating University
/ Board. For PGDM Institutions, the Change in Site / Location shall be allowed without the condition of
jurisdiction of the affiliating University.
c. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area as per norms required for the conduct of all the existing
Programme(s) and Course(s) at the new Site / Location. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify the
completeness of Infrastructure ONLY to ensure that academic and other activities be initiated at the new
Site / Location.
d. — The Equipment, Library and other movable property in the existing Institution shall be shifted to the new
Site / Location, only after approval by the Council for Change of Site / Location.
e. After shifting of the Equipment, Library and other movable property from the existing Institution to the new
Site/ Location, another Expert Visit Committee shall be conducted before the start of academic session of
the current Academic Year again to verify the availability of facilities at the new Site/Location, if required.
f. The Change of Site / Location shall be effected only on receipt of final approval in respect of new Location
and approval for activities at previous Location shall cease.
g. On approval of new Location, all activities of the Institution shall necessarily be carried out at newly
approved Location only.
h. — Any violation in this respect shall lead to Withdrawal of Approval and Institution shall not be allowed to
continue its activities in either of the Locations.
i. Request for approval for partial shifting of the Programme(s) and Course(s) in the Institution shall
not be considered.
If any Institution is found to function in an unauthorized / temporary location, violating the norms as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook, the Council shall take appropriate action.
2.18 Change in the Name of the Course(s)/Merger of the Course(s)/Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)
a. The existing Institutions seeking approval for Change in the Name of the Course(s) Merger
of the Course(s)/Reduction in Intake/Closure of Programme/ Course shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process
Handbook. Reduction of Core branches (as specified in 2.14) shall be permitted up to 30 seats.
However, in case of closure of core branches the institution shall not be permitted for any increase in
Intake/New Course against such proposed closure.
b. | Change in the name of the Course is permissible ONLY in case of the mentioned nomenclature is not
offered by the affiliating university/body as per the guidelines given in Annexure 6 or 7 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
c. Merger of certain Course(s) in Engineering and Technology in Under Graduate Degree and Diploma
Course(s) is permitted as per the guidelines given in Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook as
25
--- Page 42 ---
Approval Process Handbook
well as different specializations / courses of MBA / PGDM is permitted, so that the Intake after merger
shall be equal to the sum total of the individual Course(s) and Divisions, provided the Faculty student
ratio be maintained.
d. Institutions may apply for reduction in Intake in any of the Course(s) within a Division (non- zero)
by themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain Faculty: Student ratio, and the restoration shall be
permitted within a Division. Institutions may apply for restoration to the same level by themselves on
the AICTE Web-Portal.
e. Applications of the existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the Programme(s)/ Course(s),
and if such application is not approved by the Council due to certain deficiencies, the Institution shall
be given Extension of Approval with ZERO Intake in such Courses for the current Academic Year.
f. The application for the Closure of the Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall be valid for the duration of the
respective Course offered by the Institution within which the Institution should submit the required
mandatory documents. Else, AICTE shall initiate appropriate action to close the Programme(s)/
Course(s).
2.19 Change in the Name of the Institution/Affiliating University/Board or Type of Institution(s) converted
into a University.
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for a Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating
University/ Board or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal along with the relevant documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. Institutions applying for Change in the Name of the Institution shall follow the conditions specified in
Clauses 1.5.4 and 1.5.5 of the Approval Process Handbook
c. The Applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the affiliating University/Board and their
views on the same shall be forwarded to AICTE, within 15 days from the last date of submission of
the application. In the absence of the receipt of the views of the affiliating University/ Board on the
application, the Council shall proceed for further processing as per the provisions of Approval Process
Handbook. (Same as Clause 1.4.7 of chapter 1).
d. __Institution(s) of the same Trust/ Society/ Company applying for Change of Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University) shall apply separately for EoA based on Self- Disclosure/
any other categories mentioned in Chapter H/ Hl and pay the TER Charges, as applicable. The
Institution may also seek for Change in the Name of the Institution.
e. The Institution shall submit a representation to AICTE in case of Type of Institution (Institution converted
into a University) after the last date of submission of online application. The same shall be proceeded
as per above Clause (b).
2.20 Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/
Company including the merger of the Companies shall apply on AICTE Web- Portal along with
additional documents as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. — The change shall be permitted only for those Trusts/ Societies/ Companies which have not been
disqualified by the AICTE/ Court of Law/ any Statutory Body in the past.
c. In case of any dispute among the members of Trusts/ Societies/ Companies is of such nature that it
would affect the standard of the Institution, then AICTE shall withhold the approval as long as it may
deem fit.
d. Further, AICTE shall have the right to lien over the FDR till such time dispute among Trustees or
members is not settled by an Arbitrator or the Court of competent jurisdiction as contemplated in the
26
--- Page 43 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Trust/Society/Company document, by virtue of which amalgamation took place.
e. _ A Trust/Society may create a new Company to hold their assets, and once the transferred of assets is
complete, the Trust/Society may be dissolved and the ownership may be transferred to the company. Such
viability shall vary depending on the jurisdiction and context.
f. The Council reserves its right to reject the application for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/
Society/ Company if it finds the reasons given are not justified or commercial or business angle is
suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.
2.21 Closure of Institution
a. The existing Institution seeking for Progressive Closure or Complete Closure shall apply on AICTE Web-
Portal as per norms. The additional documents to be submitted for Closure of the Institution shall be as
per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. There shall be NO TER Charges to apply for closure.
c. In case of Progressive Closure, Closure at the First Year Level shall be allowed in the current
Academic Year and the subsequent years of working shall be closed at the end of each Academic Year
progressively. However, final Closure order shall be issued after completion of the Programme(s) and
submission of Affidavit 4 by the Institution.
d. In case of Complete Closure, the Institution shall be closed completely in one Instance.
e. | NoC for Progressive Closure or Complete Closure is subject to no pending Court case filed against the
Institution by AICTE and no Charge sheet filed against the Institution.
f. The Institutions shall not be eligible to apply for other categories listed under Chapter II/ III/ V of the
APH.
g- Applications of existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the Institution, and if such
application is not approved by the Council due to certain deficiencies; the Institution shall be given
Extension of Approval with ZERO Intake for the current Academic Year. Such Institutions shall submit all
relevant documents after all the students have passed out (or) redistributed to nearby AICTE approved
Institutions through the affiliating University/ Board and seek official Closure of the Institution.
h. The application for the Closure of the Institution shall be valid for the duration of the respective
Programme offered by the Institution within which the Institution should submit the required mandatory
documents. Else, AICTE may close the Institution with the intimation to the affiliating University/Board and
the State Government/UT and shall issue a Public Notice regarding the same. In case of such Institutions
where Security Deposits are to be released, a penalty of 10% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be
imposed before the release of Security Deposit.
i. Institutions not applied on the portal from past preceding six years for EoA, AICTE may close the
Institution with the intimation to the affiliating University/Board and the State Government/ UT and shall
issue a Public Notice regarding the same. In case of such Institutions where Security Deposits are to be
released, a penalty of 50% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed before the release of
Security Deposit.
2.22. Submission of applications (All the Institutions need to submit application as per the schedule mentioned
in Public Notice / AICTE Web portal)
27
--- Page 44 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Table 2.2- Processing Period for Different Types of Application
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s) As per Public Notice Period
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa As per Public Notice Period
Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or
ae tye . aaa Public Notice Peri
Type of Institution (except Institution(s) converted into a University) fs fear vals Netigo exec!
To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions As per Public Notice Period
Merger of Institutions under the Same /Different Trust/ Society/
_ f A Public Notice Peri
Company operating in the same Campus / City Spar hulls Serige Faulse
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the As per Public Notice Period
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
ntroduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign As per Public Notice Period
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian i
Workers in Gulf Countries.
ncrease in Intake/ Additional Course(s) As per Public Notice Period
ntroduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course As per Public Notice Period
ntroduction of Off-Campus As per Public Notice Period
ntroduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management As per Public Notice Period
Change in the Name of the Course/Merger of the Courses/
Reduction in Intake As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of Collaboration and Twinning Programme As per Public Notice Period
NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications in above categories shall be as per Public Notice
(Will have specified deadline for the submission of application).
Change of Site / Location Year round
Closure of the Institution Year round
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa Year round
Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s) Year round
Change in the Bank Details Year round
Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company Year round
Extended EoA Year round
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a Deemed-to-be-
ieee Year round
University)
Year round [Processing will
Online Learning / Open and Distance Learning courses be twice a year as per UGC
timeline
NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications (including processing fee / TER charges as
applicable) in above category -2 shall be done Year Round.
° The applications eligible to submit “Year round” shall also make online payment of the
TER Charges as per the Approval Process Handbook.
° The applications submitted after the cut-off date mentioned in the Public Notice shall not be processed
28
--- Page 45 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.23
2.23.1
2.23.2
2.23.3
2.23.4
2.24
during the current Academic Year, but shall be processed for the successive Academic Year only.
Shifting of the Campus in case of “Change of Site/ Location” shall be done only during vacation time
Processing of the Applications
Applications submitted successfully and Paid Requisite TER Charges under different clauses mentioned in
this chapter are processed as follows:
Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee:
The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated as per the procedure as defined in
Chapter I Clause 1.8 as applicable (Refer Table-2.3 of Chapter-Il).
Process for Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee (EVC)
Subsequent to Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny step, EVC will be conducted. The process of conducting EVC is indicated
at Chapter I, Clause 1.9 (Refer Table-2.3 of Chapter-lIl)
Process for Verification of Compliance through Standing Hearing Committee
The institutes shall have a chance to submit the compliance for any of the short comings based on
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/EVC related to approval before the Standing Hearing Committee. The
recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive Committee
for approval. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal along with
detailed Speaking Order. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the
Institution shall have the right to appeal once as per Clause 2.24 of this Approval Process Handbook.
Table-2.3 Indicates the Different Steps Involved in the Processing of the Applications
under different clauses mentioned in this chapter.
Appeal Procedure
a. As per the provision laid down in this clause, an Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of
the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal once to the Council within 7 days from the date
of uploading of the decision.
b. The Appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee (SAC). The
appeal schedule shall be notified on the Web-Portal.
c. Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of SAC and not to remain absent in view of the stern
time limit given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Hence, the Applicants are instructed to be prepared
with the supporting documents in proof of the compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the
Committee, even in case of short notice.
d. The Report of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed along with the observations of the
Regulation Bureau, if any, before the SAC on the date and time scheduled by AICTE.
e. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or Principal/
Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self- Attested Photo ID
proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents before the SAC.
f. The recommendations of the SAC shall be placed before the Council whose decision shall be final and
the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
29
--- Page 46 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Table-2.3: Different Steps Involved in the Processing of the Applications
Extension of Approval based on Self-
: Annexure-2 Yes - - -
Disclosure
Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Annexure-2 Yes - . .
Resident Indian(s)
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Annexure-2 - Yes Yes DA
Level and vice-versa
Change in the Name of the Institution or
affiliating University/ Board or Type of
ae rae A -2 - Ye - -
Institution (except Institution(s) converted nnexure °s
into a University)
To start new Programme/ Level in the Annexure-2 - Yes Yes DA
existing Institutions
Merger of Institutions under the same/
Different Trust/ Society/ Company Annexure-2 - Yes Yes AA
operating in the same Campus / City
Extension of Approval of the existing
Institutions after a break in the preceding
. - - Ye Ye AA
Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake / Acme es es
Hibernation
Introduction/ Continuation of
supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ - - Y _ -
Crease Citom ci lndin (OCI Chilean | “MAME &
of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries.
Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) Annexure-2 - Yes Yes AA
Diroduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Annexure-2 - Yes Yes DA
Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Annexure-2 - Yes Yes AA
Programme in Management
Change in the Name of the Course/Merger
of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake RamexureZ es
Introduction/ Continuation of Collaboration Ke hesoren? - ves Yes DA
and Twinning Programme
Change of Site/ Location Annexure-2 - Yes Yes AA
Closure of the Institution Annexure-2 - Yes - -
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-
ye : Annexure-2 - Yes - -
ed Institution and vice-versa
Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s) Annexure-2 - Yes - -
Change in the Bank Details Annexure-2 - Yes - -
Coreen the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Maneturesd 1 Yes “ -
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted
net 2 : Ye Y AA
into a Deemed-to-be-University) AR Asocece iss ys
Online Learning / ODL courses* Annexure-2 - Yes Yes AA
AA -As Applicable Depending on the
Outcome of the Previous Processing Steps
* Applications submitted will be Processed
Twice in a Year As per UGC Norms.
30
--- Page 47 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.25 Grant of Approval
n.
The applications submitted under Chapter II of the Approval Process Handbook shall be processed as
per the procedure specified in this Approval Process Handbook. The consolidated list of all the Institutions
with the “Approved Intake” shall be placed by the Regulation Bureau before the Executive Committee/
Council for the grant of Extension of Approval as applicable for the Technical Institutions to continue to
conduct Technical Programme(s) and Course(s). The decisions taken by the Executive Committee are
ratified by the Council.
The same shall be notified on the Web-Portal. Further the Institution shall download the Extension of the
approval letter along with “Approved Intake” through the Institution login.
If deficiencies are noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee for the applications submitted under
different clauses mentioned above shall be issued with ‘Speaking Order’ after giving chance to the
Institution to comply with short comings as per the Norms mentioned in this APH. However, the
deficiencies noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee shall be fulfilled & submitted as
compliance before the issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.
Applicants, whose applications are recommended for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree
Level/ Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution/ Closing one Programme and starting
another Programme shall create the Security Deposit for the balance amount of the Security Deposit
created earlier, as per the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook for the remaining period of
10 years, as applicable. No deposit is required where NOC was already issued to the Institution for the
release of the earlier FDR.
Applicants for starting new Programme/ Level (except Government) whose applications are
recommended for Approval by the Executive Committee shall be informed for the creation of Security
Deposit.
Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount to AICTE as applicable as per Clause 2.3.2 of the
Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall submit the payment proof of the Security Deposit
along with an Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation to the AICTE, else a penalty of
10% and 20% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed up to 31st May and 31st July
of the Calendar Year respectively, beyond which the approval shall be withdrawn.
The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years. The interest
accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities, Quality
Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships to students, etc.
The Principal amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the term.
However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as shall be decided
on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any violation of norms, conditions, and requirements/
Non-Performance by the Institution/Complaints against the Institution.
All approvals and speaking order, if any shall be uploaded on portal as per the Academic Calendar.
Extension of Approval shall NOT be granted after the last date as mentioned in Academic Calendar.
Institutional information shall be updated on the AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for downloading the
Extension of Approval letter.
Student's eligibility for admission shall be as per Annexure-8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions, Admission Authorities and Affiliating Universities shall strictly follow the Academic Calendar
as prescribed by the Council and placed on AICTE web portal.
Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal before 30th November
of the Calendar Year.
31
--- Page 48 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.26 Institution shall NOT offer Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) without approval of the Council.
a. — If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes without the approval of the Council, it shall be
declared as unapproved Institution and necessary punitive action shall be initiated as per Chapter VII
of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. — The Council shall maintain a list of unapproved Institutions based on the information received and shall
also inform the general public about the same from time to time.
i. Provided that any Technical Institution, which has already started without following AICTE approval
procedure, wishes to submit an application/proposal shall be considered as a new Technical
Institution. For such purpose, it shall apply as per the provisions of Chapter I of the Approval
Process Handbook.
ii. — The legal date of starting of the Institution shall be from the date of issue of the Letter of Approval
from AICTE.
c. The Institutions conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in Technical Education, in temporary location or
at location not approved by the Council shall be liable for action for Closure and other appropriate
action as per Regulations against defaulting Trust/ Society/ Company/ associated Individuals as the case
maybe.
d. The Council shall inform respective State Government/ UT to initiate appropriate penal, civil/ criminal
action against such defaulting Institutions/ Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated Individuals as the case
maybe.
e. Incase, if such Institutions make a representation, then hearing shall be given to these Institutions by the
Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE and decision shall be taken as per the provisions in the
Approval Process Handbook.
2.27 Institution shall NOT be permitted to take partial approval /courses, i.e. institution running any program
under the purview of the Council shall mandatorily take approval for ALL such Programmes. Institutions
found in violation shall be subjected to strict penal action as per Chapter VII.
2.28 Chapter VIII clarifies common doubts arising to the Stakeholders along with providing some
important information related to Approval Process.
All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Online/Offline Mode. All the processing
of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency and Accountability. Signature
of experts on the documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal is not necessary if verified
online.
fey
--- Page 49 ---
CHAPTER-III
Collaboration & Twinning Programmes
Student Exchange Programmes/Twinning Programmes, Joint Degree Programmes and Dual Degree Programmes
between Indian and Foreign University/ Institution or between two Indian Institutions in the field of Technical
Education, Research and Training
AICTE accords approval to Technical Institutions for conducting courses through collaborative/ twinning mode
programs with reputed Universities/ Higher Educational Institutions (HEls) in India/ Foreign Countries. Institutions /
Universities shall be permitted to have collaboration with reputed Industries/ Research Organizations for conducting/
offering courses which are specialized in nature (Emerging /Multidisciplinary/ Advance Technology) in flexible
mode (timings).
The colleges/Universities fulfilling the norms as envisaged in this chapter for possible grant of approval for
Twinning programmes / Foreign Collaborations / Joint Degree / Dual Degree shall be permitted to have an additional
intake of only one division for the course under this arrangement in line with UGC Regulation 2022, (Academic
collaboration between Indian and Foreign HEls to offer Twinning, Joint and Dual Degree Programmes).
a. Student Exchange Programme: Under this programme, students from HEls are allowed to study in
one of the partner institutions within the country or abroad to complete a portion of the course or
internship. A student exchange program may / may not involve physical presence of the student in
the partner institution. The students shall return to their parent institution to complete the requirements
leading to the award of degree. The student exchange programme is expected to be typically of one
or two semesters.
b. Twinning Programme: A Twinning Programme is a programme offered through an agreement/
partnership between two Higher Education Institution, which allows students to complete a portion
of the course at one Higher Education Institution and go on to complete the rest of the course at the
Partner Higher Education Institution. Under twinning programme, credits earned by the students at
Partner Foreign / Indian Higher Educational Institution shall be counted towards the degree awarded
by the parent Indian Higher Educational Institution. Under the Twinning Programme, the degrees to
be offered shall confirm to the nomenclatures and duration of the degrees as specified in the AICTE
Approval Process Handbook (2024-27) and shall also confirm to minimum eligibility and other norms
and standards to offer such degree programmes. However, credits earned by the student from the
Foreign / Indian Higher Educational Institution partnered for Twinning programme with an Indian
Higher Education Institution shall not exceed 40 percent of the total credits for the programme .
c. Joint Degree Programme: Under this programme, course curriculum shall be designed jointly by the
collaborating Universities/ Institutions and on successful completion of the programmes, the diploma/
degree shall be awarded jointly by the Higher Education Institution and the collaborative University/
Institution with a single diploma certificate/degree. Under the Joint Degree Programme, the degrees
to be offered shall confirm to the nomenclatures and duration of the degrees as specified in the AICTE
Approval Process Handbook (2024-27) and shall also confirm to minimum eligibility and other norms
and standards.
Credits earned for the course(s) in an institution shall count towards the degrees/diploma jointly
awarded by _ both the institutions. The collaborating Higher Educational Institutions shall ensure that
the credits earned by the students shall not overlap course contents/curriculum and the student shall
appear for only one examination / evaluation process for each of the courses by the Higher Education
Institution in which he/she has registered for that course. Under this programme, course curriculum
shall be designed jointly by the collaborating Universities/ Institutions in the same discipline/ subject
area and at the same level. The courses can be conducted in both the institutions and credit transfer
shall be as per the UGC Norms. However, only for diploma level courses corresponding State DTE
and partnering —_university/ institution shall decide the modalities through MOUs.
33
--- Page 50 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Dual Degree Programme: In respect of Dual Degree Course(s), UGC norms 2022 shall be
applicable. Under the Dual Degree Programme, the degrees in technical courses to be offered shall
confirm to the nomenclatures and duration of the degrees as specified in the AICTE Approval Process
Handbook (2024-27) and shall also confirm to minimum eligibility and other norms and standards
to offer such degree programme.
3.1. Objectives
a.
To facilitate academic collaboration /twinning between Indian and Foreign Universities/ Institutions/
Research Organization in the field of Technical Education, Research and Training.
To encourage Collaboration and Twinning between AICTE approved Institutions and Institutes of
Repute in India/ Foreign Countries and reputed industries/ research organization in the field of
Technical Education, Research and Training.
To safeguard the interest of the student community in India and ensure uniform maintenance of norms
and standards as prescribed by various Statutory Bodies.
To ensure accountability for such educational activities by Foreign Universities/ Institutions in India.
To safeguard against entry of Foreign Universities/ Institutions that are non-accredited in the country
of origin, to impart Technical Education in India.
To safeguard the nation’s interest and take punitive measures, wherever necessary, against the erring
Institutions.
3.2. Requirements and Eligibility
An Institution or State/ Central / Institution Deemed to be / State Private University which is already
in existence and duly approved by the Council, interested in imparting Technical Education leading
to the award of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree
of a University/ Institution through Collaborative/Twinning arrangements, provided there is
“Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.
Collaboration under these programmes shall be allowed with Foreign University having ranking
within the top 1000 as per the latest QS/ THE world ranking or with an Indian University/ Institution
which falls under the following category:
i. Accredited bythe National Assessment and Accreditation Council or any other agency authorized
in this behalf with minimum score of 3.01 on a 4.0 point scale (Applicable only for Central /
State/ Institution Deemed to be / State Private University).
or
ii. With NBA accreditation with at least 650 points on a scale of 1000
or
iii. Which figures in the Top-200 of AICTE approved Institutes in the respective category of
National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) at the time of application.
Collaboration and Twinning shall also be allowed between AICTE approved Institutions (having valid
NBA accredited courses) with an Institute of National Importance passed by an Act of Parliament or
any other AICTE approved Institutes having valid NBA accredited courses or which figures in the top
200 in the respective category of NIRF.
The Educational Programmes to be conducted in India by Foreign Universities or Institutions leading
to the award of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/Post Graduate Degree
Level (Only for regular courses conducted in physical mode) shall have the same nomenclature
as it exists in the Approval Process Handbook for Diploma/Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree should be fully recognized in their Parent Country.
34
--- Page 51 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Any Course or Programme, which jeopardizes the National interest, shall not be allowed to be offered
in India.
The Council shall prescribe any other condition for registration, expedient to do so in the overall
interest of the Technical Education system in the Country.
The Indian Partner Institution should obtain an NOC from the affiliating University/Board (Not
applicable to standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ University Departments).
Both the Institutions shall enter into a bipartite agreement/ MoU for the purpose of collaboration.
The Indian Institutions shall enter into a bipartite agreement with its affiliating body.
For Course(s) where University/ Board approval is not mandatory, both the Institutions shall enter into
a bipartite agreement/ MoU for this purpose.
Credits earned by the students shall not exceed 40% of the total credits under Twinning Programme
and joint degree programme.
The students failing to secure Visa should be enrolled in a similar Programme being conducted by the
Indian Partner Institution, affiliated to a University/ Board.
The concerned University/ Institution shall have to comply with other requirements as specified in
AICTE/ UGC 2022 regulations (Academic Collaboration Between India and Foreign Higher
Educational Institutions to offer Twining, Joit Degree and Dual Degree Programmes) while
submitting the proposal for approval as applicable (if any).
3.3. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
The TER Charges shall be paid through online on AICTE Web-Portal www. aicte-india.org failing
which, the application shall not be considered. Applications shall be accepted subject to realization of
the Payment.
TER Charges for different types of Institutions for Introduction and Continuation of Twinning
Programme(s) is as follows:
Table 3.1: Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges (Per Year)
Government/ Central/ State Public
University/ Institution set up in J&K/
i Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ 2.0 1.0
Institution set up exclusively for
Women/ PwBD
All other Institutions/ Universities
ii including Minority Institution/ Govt. 12.0 6.0
Aided Institutions.
NOTE: 10% TER charges will be increased annually.
3.4. Procedure
a.
The eligible Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Collaboration Programme shall
apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Annexure-2 of Approval
Process Handbook.
The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny / EVC as per Clause 1.8 shall verify the additional documents/facilities
as per Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Collaboration and Twinning
Programme.
35
--- Page 52 ---
Approval Process Handbook
3.5 Other Conditions:
a.
Lateral Entry and supernumerary seats shall not be allowed in Foreign Collaboration and Twinning
Programme.
The Institution shall submit/ upload an Annual Report giving details of the number of students
admitted, Programme(s) conducted, total Fee collected, amount transferred to the Parent Country,
investment made, number of students awarded Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree and any other information that the Council shall ask for.
The Council shall cause an Inspection through EVC, whenever necessary, with or without prior notice,
to assess the Infrastructural and other facilities available/ to verify the compliance of conditions,
Norms, Standards etc. prescribed by the Council from time to time.
Diploma/Degree shall be awarded as per the provisions prescribed by AICTE/ UGC on the subject as
amended from time to time.
Collaboration and Twinning shall also be allowed between AICTE approved Institutions (having valid
NBA accredited courses) with an Institute of National Importance passed by an Act of Parliament or
any other AICTE approved Institutes having valid NBA accredited courses or which figures in the top
200 in the respective category of NIRF.
Violation of any norms as envisaged by the Council shall lead to punitive action including Withdrawal
of Approval for the Institute/University.
Institutions/Universities shall fulfil all terms and conditions as prescribed by Ministry of External affairs
& MoE from time to time, in addition to the Standards & Norms set by the AICTE.
Institutions/Universities granted approval for Multiple years shall be eligible for Multiple years of
approval for Collaboration and Twinning also.
3.6 Admission and Fee
a.
Competent Authority for admission shall be the same as for regular admission and shall fetch a list of
Technical Institutions who have sought approval from the Council.
The Competent Authority for admission shall display the availability of collaboration and Twinning
Programme seats, course/ branch wise, in various Institutions, for information of candidates during
all stages of admission so that the students can freely exercise their informed choice. The Institutions
shall publish on their Brochure and Web site, the number of collaboration and Twinning Programme
seats available in the Course(s) / Division(s).
Competent Authority for admission shall prepare a merit list of Applicants by inviting applications
from eligible students for collaboration and Twinning Programme and admit strictly on merit basis.
A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each beneficiary.
Students admitted under this scheme shall not be allowed to change Institution / Course under any
circumstances.
The Institutions/Universities shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their
Websites for information to the students and other stake holders.
The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates to be
admitted under collaboration and Twinning Programme seats.
ant gaits FEI THAT |
anigil Ug Wel AMT ACH I
One should divide the non-square place by twice the square root of the square place, then
subtract the square from from the next square place.
36
--- Page 53 ---
CHAPTER-IV
Grant of Approval for Universities
4.1 Introduction
a. The higher Education system in India includes both Private and Public Universities. Public Universities
are supported by the Government of India and by the State Governments, while Private Universities
are mostly supported by various trusts and Societies. Universities in India are recognized by the
University Grants Commission (UGC), in accordance with the UGC Act, 1956. The types of
Universities include:
i. Central Universities which are established by an Act of Parliament and are under the purview
of MoE.
ii. State Universities are run by the concerned State Government/ Union Territories of India and
are established by an Act enacted by the legislative assembly of the respective State/ UT.
University shall also have “Constituent College”, an Institution/ Department/ College/ School
as a part of the University.
iii. Institutions Deemed to be University is an Institution for Higher Education so declared on the
recommendations of the University Grants Commission by the Central Government, under
Section 3 of the UGC Act.
iv. State Private Universities are established by State, recognized by the UGC and supported by
various trusts and Societies.
b. All categories of Universities offering Technical Program / Courses at all levels shall maintain Norms &
standards related to infrastructure, faculty and other norms specified by, AICTE as mentioned in the
Approval Process Handbook published from time to time and any other Norms & Standards as
prescribed by other statutory bodies concerned (as applicable).
c. AICTE Act, 1987 Clause-11 mandates the Council to conduct inspection to ascertain that a University
is maintaining the norms and standards of teaching, examination and research.
d.  Central/State and Private Universities may apply for AICTE’s approval by applying online providing
requisite details of infrastructure, land, faculty etc. as specified on the AICTE Approval Process
Handbook apart from fulfilling UGC Norms. The Applicant shall also adhere to the existing Central,
State and Local Laws.
e. Area of jurisdiction of State Universities/Private Universities/Institutions Deemed to be Universities
(including off campuses) shall be as approved by the UGC/ State jurisdiction.
f. Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Course(s)/Programme(s) shall NOT admit
students without prior approval of the Council.
4.2 Existing Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University shall be eligible for getting 3 years’ Extension
of Approval (EoA) from the AY-2024-25 by remitting 3 years’ TER Charges (Table 4.1) by meeting ANY ONE
of the following criteria:
i. Figured in 8th Edition of NIRF ranked Institutions (announcement made in 5th June 2023).
ii. Figuring in QS World Ranking Asia-2024 (announcement made on 8th Nov 2023).
iii. Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University having minimum of 30% eligible courses in regular
modewithNBAaccreditation havingvaliditytill 30thApril2025. (Theinstitutionsshouldcontinueto
get accreditation of their programmes).
37
--- Page 54 ---
4.3
44
4.4.1
4.4.2
4.4.3
Approval Process Handbook
iv. Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University with valid NAAC score of 3.01 and above on
a scale of 4.0
v. Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University having conferred ‘Autonomous Status’ by UGC.
vi. Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University having more than 80% admissions in all the
courses/programmes offered consecutively for last 5 Academic Years.
NOTE: Although, the Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be University can get extended EoA for 3
years yet they need to submit information/data annually during the AICTE Approval Process
time for respective years annually.
Time Schedule for Processing of Applications
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE Website
from time to time, inviting applications along with cut-off dates for various categories and processing
thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall be final and binding.
To process any request from the Universities regarding approval, online application is mandatory.
Applications submitted offline are not accepted.
b. — The submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal and payment shall not be later than the last
date as notified in the Public Notice/AICTE Website.
Seeking Approval of the Council
Application for the various categories mentioned in Chapter I, Il and Ill of the Approval Process
Handbook for Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level for conducting
Programmes in Engineering and Technology, Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design, Hotel
Management and Catering Technology, MCA and Management.
Requirements and Eligibility
a. Notification issued by the Government under Central/ State Act declaring an Institution as a
Central/ State/ Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a Deemed
to be University.
b. The Central / State / Private / Institution Deemed to be University shall be a registered Society
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/ Secretary of Society or a
Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any other
relevant Acts through the Chairman/Secretary of the Trust or a Company established under
Section 8 of Companies Act, 2013 or Central or State Government/ UT Administration or by
a Society or a Trust registered with them.
University having Multiple Campuses/ Off Campuses/ Constituent Colleges shall apply separately for
approval in respect of each campus/off campus/ constituent college (OR) They can apply as a single
entity with all their courses & programs of both Main and Off campus.
All Universities (Central/State Government/State Private) and Category-l&ll Deemed to be University
shall be permitted to run courses/programs with nomenclatures prescribed in AICTE APH.
NOTE-i The Central / State / Private Universities are taking approval from AICTE for some of the
selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake which is creating confusion to the students.
Therefore, the Central / State / Private Universities, which are interested in obtaining AICTE
approval shall have to obtain approval for all the Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) / intake
and not just for few selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake (at any level) after
fulfilling the mandatory requirement of AICTE norms notified from time to time.
38
--- Page 55 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii: For Institutions Deemed to be Universities, it is mandatory to have AICTE approval from the
Academic Year 2018-19 in compliance with the Hon’ble Supreme Court Order dated
03-11- 2017 passed in CA No.17869- 17870 /2017. It is found that some of the Deemed to
be Universities yet to take AICTE approval or have taken approval partially for selected
Technical Course(s)/ Programme(s)/ Intake (at any level).Therefore, Institutions Deemed to be
Universities which have never taken approval from AICTE aredirected NOT to run any
Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) without prior approval of AICTE.
4.4.4 a. State Public & Private Universities and Central Universities are required to maintain Norms &
Standards as specified in APH from time to time and shall take AICTE approval for regular courses
(falling under the purview of council) in case the same courses are to be offered in ODL/OL mode
(Ref. UGC Regulation).
b. — Application for partial approval of any Programme(s)/Course(s)/Intake at any level shall NOT be
permitted.
4.5 Application Submission and Processing
4.5.1 USER ID and Password
4.5.2 Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. Existing Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree applying for the
grant of approval for the first time:
Table 4.1: Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges (Per Year)
Central University/ State Public University/ Institution
Deemed to be University (Government) and University 2.00
set up in J&K/ Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ University ,
set up exclusively for Women
Institution Deemed to be University (Private)/ State
" Private University 10.00
ALL Applicants under (i) & (ii) whose application was For Category (i) 1.00
iii rejected and Final LoR was issued in the last Academic 7
Year ** For category (ii) 4.00
* Separate TER Charges shall be applicable in case of main and off campus as approved by UGC.
** Not applicable for Applications, which were, rejected in preceding year and TER Charges refunded
to the applicant as per the Clause 1.4.2(h).
NOTE: 10% TER charges will be increased annually.
b. — In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional online Scrutiny Committee and Standing Hearing
Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to
any type of University other than Central/State Universities/Institution deemed to be
university(Government)), then the Applicant has to remit Rs. 0.60 Lakh through online mode as an additional
TER Charges.
c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional (online / Physical) Expert Visit Committee
has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Universities other than
Central/State Universities/Institution deemed to be university (Government)), the Applicant
has to remit Rs. 1.25 Lakh for Online and Rs. 2.50 Lakh for physical EVC, through online mode
as an additional TER Charges.
d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal within
the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.
39
--- Page 56 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4.5.3. a. Applicants shall submit the application on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org. on or before
the last date as mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website and it is MANDATORY.
b. — All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited is correct. Facility to edit the data will
be available until the submission of the application. After submission, the modification of
data shall not be allowed till the processing of application is completed. Hence, applicants
shall exercise utmost care before final submission of the application.
c. Applications complete in all respect and submitted (including payment) within the
cut-off date as mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall only be considered for
processing as per the norms and procedures specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
4.5.4 An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner on
Rs. 100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed (Using DSC) &
uploaded on AICTE Portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, civil
and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.
4.5.5. A printout of the complete online application (for categories falling under Chapter I of the Approval
Process Handbook) as submitted on AICTE Web-Portal, along with the proof of payment, and
documents mentioned as per Annexure-1 of the Approval Process Handbook duly attested by the
Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust shall be submitted on the date of Scrutiny and to be uploaded on
AICTE Web-portal with digital signature, (in case of online), failing which the Scrutiny shall not be
conducted.
4.5.6 For applications submitted for the categories mentioned under Chapter II and III, the documents
should be submitted/uploaded as applicable in Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
4.6 Grant of Approval
4.6.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the built-up area as required and has its
Lawful possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company/ Insti
tution or on long term lease on or before the date of submission of application.
Further to that it shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed University to
mortgage the Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of Letter of Approval (LoA), only for
raising the resources for the purpose of development of the University situatedon that Land.
b. University shall fulfill ALL the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Further
that, the Institution Deemed to be Universities shall also have to fulfil the norms as per UGC
Regulations and statutory body concerned.
c. Buildings for the First Year of the Programme(s) should be completed in all respect as per the
Infrastructure requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Building Plan for
the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the University shall be prepared by an Architect
registered with Council of Architecture/Licensed Survey or and shall be approved by the
Competent Authority as designated by the concerned State Government/UT.
d. The Head of the “University” shall be named as “Vice Chancellor” having qualifications as per UGC
norms.
4.6.2 The Applicants shall not use name of the University in such a way that the abbreviated form of the
name of the University becomes IIM/ IIT/ IISc/ NIT/ IISER/ IIIT/ IIEST/ AICTE/ = UGC/ MoE/ Gol. The
Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government, India, Indian, National, All India, All India
Council, Commission anywhere in the name of the University and other names as prohibited under
the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided that, the restrictions
mentioned above shall not be applicable, if the University is established by Government of India or
its name is approved by the Government of India.
40
--- Page 57 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4.6.3 The Applicant shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal for all the Technical Programme(s) as approved by
UGC for Approval.
4.6.4 The application shall be processed as per Clause 4.6 and 4.7 of the Approval Process
Handbook (Through Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee).
4.7 Evaluation of the Applications
4.7.1 Universities and _ institutions Deemed to be Universities falling under Category I/Il as per UGC
(Categorization of Universities (Only) for grant of Graded Autonomy) Regulations, 2018;
The application submitted shall be evaluated with respect to the following:
a. NAAC Certificate indicating score letter issued by UGC declaring the status of the University
for Category I/II and other (If applicable)
b. Notification issued by the Government under Central /State Act declaring an institution as a
Central /State/Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a Deemed
to be University.
c. UGC approval letter(s) for the main Campus and Off Campuses if any.
d. Affidavit 2 and 5 (Universities shall have to adhere to norms and standards specified by AICTE
from time to time.
NOTE: In case the above documents are not uploaded on portal, the University may be directed to upload
the same on the portal within the stipulated time. The formation of Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny committee
and verification of the aforesaid documents will be online.
4.7.2 Universities other than Category I/II, running technical programme but coming for AICTE’s approval
for the first time, the applications submitted shall be evaluated as per the Clause 1.8 of Chapter I of
this APH.
4.7.3 Universities other than Category I/II, running AICTE approved technical programme and desirous
to apply for various categories in accordance with Chapter II Applications submitted shall be
processed as per the applicable classes defined in Chapter II of this APH.
NOTE-
1: For Category I/ Il Universities applying for other domains (for e.g. Medical University), applying
for approval of Engineering and Technology Programme shall be processed similar to a new
Technical Institutions provided that the university is already running courses in Engineering and
Technology.
2D: To consider the Off Campuses/ Constituent Colleges of Category |/ Il Universities/ Institutions
Deemed to be Universities, UGC Letter as well as NAAC mentioning to that effect shall be pro
duced, else the applications shall be processed as per Chapter I of this APH.
3: Applicants falling under Category | & Il and other than category | & Il shall upload all self- attested
copies as per Annexure-1 (as applicable) of the Approval Process Handbook and UGC approval
Letter(s) for the Main Campus and Off Campuses, if any, with digital signature (in case of online).
Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain absent at the time of
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny. TER Charges per campus to be charged as per Table 4.1
4.8 Grant of Approval shall be as per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook
4]
--- Page 58 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4.9 Other Conditions
An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has passed
out, to verify the fulfilment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
If the application for the new Institution Deemed to be University/University is rejected at the Level of
Scrutiny/Re- Scrutiny and the appeal provision is not availed, the TER Charges after a deduction of
Rs. 0.60 Lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.
The Council shall normally not grant Conditional Approval to any University.
The University/Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of Executive Committee, shall appeal as per
Clause 1.11 of the Approval Process Handbook and the final decision of the Council shall be
uploaded as per the Academic Calendar.
Infrastructure, faculty and other facilities shall be made available as per the norms, standards and
conditions prescribed by the Council from time to time.
A final Letter of Approval/ Letter of Rejection with the reasons for rejection of the application shall be
issued to the University through Web-Portal as per the Academic Calendar.
LoA shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
4.10 Security Deposit (SD) :
NOTE:
Central University/ State University/ /Institution Deemed to be University (Government) are
not required to pay the Security Deposit.
Private Universities/ Institution Deemed to be University (Private) which were in existence for
more than 10 years with UGC are EXEMPTED from the payment of Security Deposit, else the
University shall pay the Security Deposit for 10 Years as per Chapter-I (Table1.4) of this
Approval Process Handbook.
If any University is starting a new Programme/ Level shall create the Security Deposit as per
the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook, even if the University is in existence for
more than 10 years with UGC.
I. Universities which were granted approval from AICTE earlier as a Technical Institution and
created Security Deposit and got released after the maturity periodare not required to pay the
Security Deposit; else the University shall pay the Security Deposit for the remaining period of 10
years, as applicable.
ii. The amount deposited by the University shall remain with the Council. The interest
accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities,
Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty members and giving Scholarships to students.
iii. The Principle amount ONLY shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on
completion of the term. However, the term of the deposited amount can be extended for a
further period as shall be decided on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any
violation of norms, conditions, and requirements and/ or Non-Performance by the
University and/ or Complaints against the University.
4.11 Existing Universities/Institution deemed to be university granted approval for offering Technical Programme
at Diploma/Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree Level shall submit an application to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of the Course(s)/
program(s) offered by the University.
42
--- Page 59 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4.12 Applications submitted for other Categories in Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
A417
4.18
4.19
a. The requirements, eligibility and procedure shall be as per the concerned Clauses of Chapter II/ Ill
of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Expert Visit Committee for the Introduction of
supernumerary seats for OCI/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries
for Category I/ Il Universities shall be exempted.
b. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges as mentioned in Chapter II/II are applicable.
NOTE: In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee, Expert Visit Committee
and Standing Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (inclusive
of theCourt directions to any type of Institutions), then the Applicant has to remit an additional
TER Charges as applicable in Clause 4.5.2.
c. The applications shall be processed as per the procedure specified in the Approval Process Handbook
and the Executive Committee/ Council shall grant Extension of Approval as applicable for the
Universities to continue for conduct of Technical Programme(s) and Course(s). The decisions taken by
the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.
d. The decision of the Council shall be included in the issuance of Extension of Approval and uploaded
on the Web-Portal and the Universities shall download the same through their login id. Speaking
orders (in case of reduction in Intake, No Admission, etc.) shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal not
later than the date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Increase in Intake/ New Course shall be processed as per Clause 2.6 of Chapter II of the Approval Process
Handbook. The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as specified in
Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Programme(s) approved by the Council, falling under
Category I/Il as per UGC (Categorization of Universities (Only) for grant of Graded Autonomy) Regulations,
2018 shall have to submit an application to the Council indicating the increase in Intake in the Courses/New
Course(s)in Emerging /Multidisciplinary areas. The Council shall be granting approval to those Programmes/
Courses. However, such Universities shall have to update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and
comply with the norms and standards as specified by AICTE from time to time. The University shall annually
submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to UGC with this effect.
If any complaints received about violation of the norms, AICTE shall inspect the University and inform UGC to
take appropriate action. In case of Institution Deemed to be University, the action as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to UGC & MoE (as applicable).
Extension of Approval shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Institutional information shall be updated on AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for downloading the
Extension of Approval letter.
Students’ eligibility for admission shall be as per Annexure-8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
All Universities shall follow the Academic Calendar as notified by the Council from time to time.
Student enrolment details shall be uploaded on the AICTE Web-Portal before last date (Academic Calendar
for the respective year).
Board of Governors (BoG)/Board of Management (BoM) shall be constituted for the Institution Deemed to
be University (Private)/ State Private University. BoM of Universities shall be as per the Acts and Statutes of
UGC. The minutes of the meetings shall be uploaded periodically on the website of the Universities.
43
--- Page 60 ---
4.20
4.21
4.22
4.23
Approval Process Handbook
As perAICTE and UGC regulations all the approved Universities/Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall
display on their web site the mandatory disclosure including approved intake, students admitted, their Fee
structure, Time schedule for payment of Fee forthe entire Programme, Refund Policies. (NOTE: Format forthe
Mandatory Disclosure is available in this APH).
To maintain a high standard in Technical Education, the Universities shall adopt quality measures such as
revision of Curriculam in tune with the changing trends in the industrial development, performing Academic
Audit, conducting innovative academic and sponsored research, publishing papers in refereed journals and
apply for granting Patents.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities that have been recognized as an Institute of Eminence (IOE) by the
Ministry of Education, Government of India shall be exempted from going through the process of approval
annually for offering Technical Programmes/ Courses. However, such Universities shall have to update the
data on AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply with the norms and standards as specified by AICTE
from time to time. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to UGC to this
effect. If any complaint is received about the violation of the norms, AICTE shall inspect the University and
inform the MoE and UGC to take appropriate action. In case of Institution Deemed to be University, the action
as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to the MoE and UGC.
An Institution (Deemed to be University) found running a technical programme without prior approval of the
council shall be liable for appropriate penal action as per Chapter VII.
NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be conducted preferably in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions) the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be conducted in Offline
mode also. Proceedings of the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be recorded to have Transparency and
Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal is not
necessary if verified online.
fe 3 Tat FTgeqeent aft 4 afer | stettrearct araarhet |
afe aaa Sree yasadicenre, 4 eave |
we ofe | oat St wfafsar | ear Arges |
wa Area sae Morrcafsaratet
TIM SEM: HerafssaraeN Asad Te |
“Does the foetus in the mother’s womb eat or not?” It is said “It does not, if it does, there ought
to be a fecal matter (from the foetus) later on, But this does not exist so. How so then? In the
navel of the foetus the tubular (blood) vessels are established and from them other vessels and
from these, still other (vessels) are taking residence in the hearts of the mother (ultimately); these
by carrying the assimilable essence of the food (rasa) gratify and develop the foetus. How? This
is channels (kulyah) which process up exactly (tadvat) in the way of the irrigatory (bhavayanti)
ie. offer water and help in thriving (the plant) its roots going towards the shelter of the basin i.e.
(kedaram) as around a developing tree.
44
--- Page 61 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-V
Approval for Open and Distance Learning (ODL)/Online
Learning (OL)
5.1 Introduction
a All India Council for Technical Education (Open and Distance Learning Education and Online
Education) Guidelines, 2021, shall apply to Standalone Institutions, Institutions Deemed to be
Universities and Universities (Central, State Public and State Private) for all the Courses of learning at
the Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level programmes in
Management, Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, Cyber Security, Block Chain,
Logistics and Travel & Tourism.
b. | The Council shall NOT allow Open and Distance Learning at Diploma/Degree/ Post Graduate Degree
in Engineering and Technology, Planning, Hotel Management and Catering Technology, Applied Arts
and Crafts, and Design Programmes.
c. | Asper the UGC (Open and Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulations 2020,
approval/recommendation of respective regulatory body is necessary for running the programmes of
that domain and accordingly Institutions Deemed to be Universities and State Public & Private Universities
shall apply and secure the same.
d. | The NAAC score as per the guidelines notified by UGC from time to time shall be applicable for the
Institution(s) Deemed to be University and Universities (Central, State Public or State Private) and NBA
score as per the guidelines notified by AICTE from time to time shall be applicable for the Standalone
institutions for grant of approval to run programmes /courses under ODL and Online.
e. No Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ State Public & Private university shall
offer a Course(s) falling under AICTE Purview in Open and Distance Learning mode/ Online and admit
students without the approval by the Council.
f. The Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University / State Public & Private university shall
create a separate Department/ School/ Centre as Headquarters for offering Courses in Open and
Distance Learning mode.
5.2 _ Existing Institutions/Universities shall be eligible for getting 3 years’ Extension of Approval
(EoA) from the AY-2024-25 by remitting 3 years’ TER Charges (Table 5.5) by meeting ANY ONE of the
following criteria:
a. — Figured in 8th Edition of NIRF ranked Institutions (announcement made in 5th June 2023).
b. Figuring in QS World Ranking Asia-2024 (announcement made on 8th Nov 2023).
c. Institutions/Universities having minimum of 30% eligible courses in regular mode with NBA
accreditation having validity till 30th April 2025. (The institutions should continue to get accreditation
of their programs)
d. __Institutions/Universities with valid NAAC score of 3.01 on scale of 4.0 and above.
e. __ Institutions/Universities having conferred ‘Autonomous Status’ by UGC.
f. Institutions/Universities having more than 80% admissions in all the courses/programmes offered
consecutively for last 5 Academic Years.
NOTE 1: Although, the institutions can get extended EoA for 3 years, annually they need to submit
information/data during the AICTE Approval Process time of respective years.
2: Universities/Institutions granted NOC by the Council in the preceding years shall apply again for
obtaining formal approval during this AY 2024-25. Otherwise NOC granted/issued earlier
shall be withdrawn.
45
--- Page 62 ---
5.3
5.3.1.
5.3.2.
5.3.3.
Approval Process Handbook
Norms and Standards
a. Any Institutions / Universities keen on seeking approval for ODL/OL shall first apply for approval to offer the
said courses in regular mode to AICTE. The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities and
University (Central, State Public or State Private) intending to run Courses in Open and Distance Learning
mode and / or online mode shall submit an application to the Council for Approval / Extension of Approval
for the Courses approved/ Increase/ reduction in Approved Intake / Introduction of new Course(s) and
Closure of Course(s).
b. State Public & Private Universities and Central Universities are required to maintain Norms & Standards as
specified in APH from time to time and shall take AICTE approval for regular courses (falling under the
purview of council) in case the same courses are to be offered in ODL/OL mode(Ref. UGC Regulation).
c. Application for partial approval of any Programme(s)/Course(s)/Intake at any level shall NOT be permitted.
Learner's enrolment:
ODL Mode: A Learner residing in any part of the Country can enrol to pursue a programme/course through
ODL mode provided that the Institution shall conduct all activities such as admissions, contact programmes,
examinations etc. for learner strictly within the territorial jurisdiction of the Institution as specified in these
regulations. In case the enrolment is higher than 1000 at a Learner Support Centre, the number of positions
and Infrastructure shall be increased on pro-rata basis.
Online Mode: A Learner residing within or outside India may enrol in any programme by an
Institution offering programme under Online mode.
Academic and Administrative Requirements
A Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/University (Central, State Public or State private)
shall have a designated Centre of Distance Education at Headquarters for operationalising the Prgrammes/
Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode / online mode, shall be headed by a regular functionary not
below the rank of a Professor and shall have the following positions on Full Time and dedicated basis,
excluding the designated positions in the Open Universities as per their respective Act(s), along with
infrastructural facilities. In addition to the Headquarters, an Institution may have a Learner Support Centre(s).
Table 5.1 Academic and Administrative Requirements at Headquarters
S.No | Staff Requirements Number
] Head for each discipline at Professor Level ]
Minimum Academic staff strength per discipline or specialization or Course
2 Associate Professor ]
Assistant Professor 2
Administrative staff strength at the Institution
Deputy Registrar
Assistant Registrar
3 Section Officer
Assistants
Computer Operator
Multi-Tasking Staff
NIN] wlo]o}]o
If the Institution is intending to operate the Headquarters as Learner Support Centre, an intake up to 5000
Learners shall be permitted. In case, the enrolment is higher than 5000 at Headquarters, the number of
positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on a pro-rata basis. In case the enrolment is higher than 1000
at a Learner Support Centre, the number of positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on prorata basis.
46
--- Page 63 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Table 5.2 Academic and Administrative Requirements at Headquarters
Learning Supporting Centre
S.No. | Staff Requirements Number
1 Assistant Professor (Coordinator) 1
2 Counsellor per Theory Course of 4 Credits 2
3 Supervisor per Practical Course of 2 Credits 1
4 Computer Operator 1
5.3.4. Infrastructure Requirements
1. The Institution shall have necessary infrastructure and support system for offering the Courses in Open
and Distance Learning Mode and / or Online Mode.
2. — The Institution shall be permitted to use additional Laboratory facilities of the parent Institution or any
another AICTE approved Institution offering similar Course/ Programme.
3. Each Learner Support Centre shall have a minimum Built-up area of 150 Sq m on the as is that it shall
have at least one Class room for the interaction with the Learners.
Table 5.3 Minimum Infrastructure Requirements for ODL/Online
S . Percentage | Headquarters Learner Support
No. Type of Built-up Area (%) in Sqm Centre in Sqm
Academic Area 50 750 66
2 | Administrative Area 10 150 33
Academic support such as Library, Reading
3 Room, Computer Centre, Informational and 30 450 150
Communication Technology Laboratories,
Video and Audio Laboratories, etc.
4 | Amenities or other support facilities Area 10 150 66
Minimum Built-up area for Open and
5 | Distance 1500 150 150
Learning activity
NOTE: Minimum Internet Speed required at Headquarters/ Learner Support Centre is 300 Mbps.
i. The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the differently abled students
and elderly persons comprising Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others including parents of the
students visiing the Institution. Barrier Free Built Environment for differently abled / elderly
persons shall be available in the Buildings including hygienic toilets for ladies and gents.
ii. All teaching-learning facilities for differently abled learners shall be provided in the Ground Floor
itself. Toilets with all facilities shall be provided in each floor or at least in the Ground Floor
at Headquarters as well as Learner Support Centers as specified by the National Building Code.
iii. Safety and security measures at all the Learner Support Centres and Headquarters to safeguard
Students, Staff and other stakeholders from the threat of violence, and to provide appropriate
interventions to support individuals in crisis shall be ensured.
47
--- Page 64 ---
5.3.5
5.3.6.
5.3.7.
Approval Process Handbook
Academic Requirements
i. One faculty member in the respective course domain shall be deployed as Program Coordinator. One
Academic support and one administrative support personnel for every program/course shall be provided
to the students.
ii. Learning support material shall be provided to all students and there shall be a provision for live lecture
class facility for students for a batch size upto 60.
iii. Dedicated faculty members shall be assigned to address student academics queries in the form of live
chat during official hours.
iv. The institute needs to ensure a Faculty student ratio of 1:30 for evaluation of project assessment &
assignments submitted by students. Also, there shall be a provision for online evaluation of assignments /
conduct of weekly tests using online software tools. Facul;ty members from the institution under the same
Management deployed for teaching courses in regular mode can also be deployed for this purpose.
v. The design of programme shall be on outcome based education. Faculty for Content creators, live
sessions, delivery of content shall be put in place.
vi. A Standard Learning Management System shall be in place for Online as well as for ODL Programs/
Courses.
Duration and Entry Level Qualifications
The duration and entry level qualifications for the Programmes/ Courses offered under ODL/OL
is given in Annexure-8.
A candidate shall register for only ONE Course in Open and Distance Learning mode in any
Learner Support Centre at a time and shall not be permitted to register for another Course until he/ she
successfully completes the Course requirement/ discontinue the Course officially.
ii. | A student who is pursuing any Course in the Conventional mode shall be permitted to register for ONE
Course at the Lower Level in Open and Distance Learning mode in any Learner Support Centre at a time
and shall not be permitted to register for another Course until he/ she successfully completes the Open
and Distance Learning Course requirement/ discontinue the Course officially.
iii. |The students shall be admitted twice (July and January) in an Academic Year within the Approved Intake
for each Course.
iv. Students’ enrolment data in all the Learner Support Centres shall be uploaded to AICTE Web- Portal
within one month from the last date for admission every year failing which the Council shall not grant
approval in the next Academic Year.
Admissions and ExaminationsAdmission, Examinations and Learner Support shall be as per the
respective Part IV of AICTE (Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021
(As amended from time to time).
Assessment, Accreditation, Audit, Inspection and Monitoring shall be as per the respective Part V of AICTE (Open
and Distance Learning and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021 (As amended from time to time).
The Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/State /Central/State Private University
shall apply for the Courses as mentioned in the table below at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Post
Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree levels with the proposed Intake in
Headquarters and/ or each Learner Support Centre. The Council shall grant approval for the Courses along
with their Approved Intake in each Learner Support Centre, subject to the fulfilment of AICTE (ODL/Online)
Guidelines by the Headquarters and the number of Learner Support Centres.
48
--- Page 65 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Table 5.4 Nomenclature of Degree / Diploma / Certificate
Under Graduate Course in Business Administration (BBA/
1) Business BMS, etc.)/ Master of Business Administration (MBA) / Post
Administration Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) / Post Graduate
Certificate (PGCM)
bitermefefenaiea oy Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
2) Logistics
PGC)
3) Travel and Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
Tourism PGC)
Under Graduate Course in Computer Applications (BCA)
1) Computer / Master of Computer Application (MCA) / Post Graduate
Applications Diploma in Computer Application (PGDCA) / Post Graduate
Certificate (PGC)
2) Artificial Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
Intelligence and PGC
Computer Data Science
Applications | 3) Artificial Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
Intelligence and PGC
Machine Learning
D, : ra
A) Giber Saami, oot Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
D, : ra
5) Block Chain oot Grocvote Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate
The Headquarters and each Learner Support Centre of Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be
University shall establish Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Anti Ragging Committee, Grievance
Redressal Committee and Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
All Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities (Central, State Public
or State Private) shall upload the Transcripts and Certificates of all students enrolled, Year wise and
Course wise for all Learner Support Centres (if applicable) including Headquarters on Academic
Bank of Credit (ABC).
In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected from the
student, after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand
only) shall be refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions to retain the School/
Institution Leaving Certificates in original. In case, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the
vacated seat is consequently filled by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must
refund the Fee collected after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than Rs.1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) and proportionate deductions of Fee.
The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities (Central, State Public or
State Private) shall display in their Website as well as upload on AICTE portal the mandatory disclosure
as specified in the Guidelines including the nomenclature of the Courses and Approved Intake, students
admitted, their Fee structure, Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Course, Refund Policy, etc.
in each Learner Support Centre including headquarter.
--- Page 66 ---
Approval Process Handbook
5.3.8. Grant of Approval
5.3.9.
The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities) or Standalone
Institutions, may apply for offering programmes through the Open and Distance Learning mode and/
or Online mode, courses in the field of Management and allied areas, Computer Applications, Artificial
Intelligence and Data Science, Logistics and Travel & Tourism who fulfil the following conditions, namely:
Universities (Central, State Public or Private)/ Institutions Deemed to be University having a rank in
Top-200 in the University category of National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), at least twice in three
preceding cycles (at the time of application).
OR
The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities), which are in
existence for minimum five years with at least two batches passed out and having NAAC score of 3.01 ona
scale of 4.0; subject to the condition that they shall achieve a NAAC score of 3.26 or above in the
forthcoming applicable cycle.
Standalone Institutions having a NBA Score of 700 on a scale of 1000;
OR
Shall be in the top-200 in the institution category in the National Institutional Ranking Framework at least once
in last 2 preceding cycles as per UGC/AICTE Gazette notification (at the time of application)
TER Charges
Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges Rs. in Lakh for Standalone Institutions/ institutions Deemed to be
Universities offering a Courses at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree Level in Open and Distance Education Learning are given below:
Table 5.5 TER Charges for ODL/OL Courses
New application for the conduct of Open and
Distance Learning Courses from Standalone
i Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University 10.00 10.00
(Headquarters and upto 2 Learner Support
Centres for the total Intake upto 5000)
New application by the existing AICTE approved 1.25 1.25
Institution running either ODL or OL Courses . .
wae Each additional Learner Support Centre (Intake .
iii upto1000) 3.50 Not Applicable
iv Extension of Approval (Intake upto1000) 2.00 2.00
Introduction of New Course /Increse in approve
Vv Intake in the courses (for every 1000 Seats in 2.50 2.50
learner support centre) or headquarters.
All Applications under (i) whose applications for
Rejected unissued final LoR in the precedding 2.50 2.50
Year
Closure of Course(s)/ Reduction in  Intake/ 2syforeach
v . Learner Support 0.25
Change in the Name of the Course(s)
Centre/Headquarters
NOTE: 10% increase in TER Charges annualy. TER Charges mentioned in above table or applicable for all
Universities (including State/UT Public Universities)
i. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee has to be conducted (inclusive of
the Court directions to any type of Institutions), then the Applicant has to remit Rs. 1.0 Lakh through online
as an additional TER Charges. In similar cases for the conduct of additional Expert Visit Committee), the
Applicant has to remit Rs.2.0 Lakh and for Standing Hearing/ Appellate committee the applicant has to
remit Rs 1.0 Lakh
50
--- Page 67 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii. | The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal within the deadline
failing which, the application shall not be considered. Only those applications submitted within the cut-
off date, including payment shall be considered for processing.
iii. In case of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be refunded to the
Applicant.
iv. Applications rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision, the
TER Charges after a deduction of Rs. 60000/- (Rupees Sixty Thousand only) shall be refunded to the
Applicant/ Institution.
5.3.10. Approval Procedure
i. For the detailed procedure with respect to the Scrutiny/Expert Visit Committee and Standing
Hearing/appellate Committee, the applicant shall refer to Clause 1.8 & 1.9 of this Approval Process
Handbook.
ii The Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/State /Central/State Private University shall
ao
ubmit an application to the Council every year for the Extension of Approval of the Courses.
iii. The Institutions may apply for non-zero reduction in Intake by themselves in AICTE Web- Portal and
maintain the norms accordingly (No TER Charges shall be levied).
iv. The Institutions shall apply for increase in Approved Intake in the Courses Introduction of new
Course(s) upto the maximum number of Learners permitted at any Learner Support Centre by
themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain the norms accordingly (No TER Charges shall be levied).
<
4
he application for establishment of Headquarters/ Learner Support Centres shall be processed as per
Clause 1.8 (Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee) followed by an Expert Visit Committee as per Clause
1.9 of the Approval Process Handbook. The date of visit shall be communicated through e-mail. The
Council shall not grant approval to Learner Support Centre(s) without the approval for Headquarters. The
Institutions already approved by Distance Education Council (DEC) and UGC till 2023-24 shall have to
comply AICTE requirements and an Affidavit for the same shall have to be submitted to AICTE.
5.3.11. Others
i. Any Institution/University propose to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not available as
mentioned in Annexure-11 of this Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence, as the case
may be, by the Council for the same shall be necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution with
due endorsement by the Registrar/ Director of affiliating University/ Technical Institution shall submit
detailed Syllabus and Curriculum and its nomenclature to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau,
AICTE before 30th November of the Calendar Year, to process the same in the respective Board.
ii. All the Institutions/Universities shall strictly adhere to the Norms and Requirement mentioned in
Chapter-VI.
iii. All the Institutions/Universities shall strictly adhere to the Norms for duration, entry level
qualifications and statutory reservations of Technical Programmes/Courses as applicable for
admission and other Academic purpose.
iv. Penal action against violation/ non-adherence of norms /standards as specified by the council shall
be referred vide Clause 8.3 of this Approval Process Handbook.
PROUT HAA: |
Aq Hala PROUT: |
There is no effect possible without a cause. But the absence of effect does not mean the absence
of cause.
51
--- Page 68 ---
--- Page 69 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-VI
STANDARD NORMS AND REQUIREMENTS
Section A: Standard Norms to be followed by AICTE approved Institutes
The below mentioned standard norms are mandatorily to be followed by all the AICTE approved Institutions:
6.1 All the Documents submitted along with the online Applications for Starting a New Technical Institution
under Chapter shall be as per the Annexure-1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
6.2. All the Documents submitted along with the online Applications for obtaining Extension of Approval for
existing Instituition under Chapter IlI/ Ill shall be as per the provisions mentioned in Annexure-2 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
6.3 The Technical Institutions offering Technical Programs / Courses shall follow “Academic Calendar” as notified
by the Council from time to time.
6.4. The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the Technical Programmes such as Diploma/ Post Diploma
Certificate/ Undergraduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Levels has been provided
in the Annexure- 8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Note: Any Foreign National who has obtained School Leaving Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree from a Foreign
Institution shall produce an Equivalency Certificate issued by the Association of Indian Universities or other
appropriate recognized agencies for admission to an Institution/ University in India.
6.5 In order to facilitate employed/ working professionals, Council has made a special provision by providing
flexibility in timing to conduct theory and practical classes (even beyond office hours) so has to upgrade their
skills and knowledge. This will be treated as regular mode and NOT as an evening program/ part-time.
Institutes shall follow the guidelines notified by AICTE from time to time, Working professionals with ITI (or
equivalent)/Diploma/UG qualifications enrolled in regular Diploma/UG/ PG Programmes respectively shall be
allowed to do the theory and practical in flexible timing to enrich their skills and knowledge.
6.6 The concerned State Government/ UT Admission Authority shall decide modalities for the admission.
6.7 The list of approved courses nomenclature at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Undergraduate Degree/ Post
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Programmes in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/Applied Arts
and Crafts/Design/Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ Computer Application / Management have
been provided in the Annexure- 11 of the Approval Process Handbook.
a. Any Institution proposes to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not available in
Annexure-11 of the Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence by the Council for the same shall be
necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution with due endorsement by the Registrar/ Director of
affiliating University/ Board/ Technical Institution shall submit detailed Syllabus and Curriculum and
its nomenclature to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE before 30th November of the
Calendar Year, to process the same in the respective year.
b. All branches of Engineering and Technology shall offer Elective Subjects in the Emerging/
Multidisciplinary/ Region Specific Areas as specified in Annexure-11 of the Approval Process
Hand book.
i; Undergraduate Degree Subjects in Emerging / Multidisciplinary/ Region Specific Areas shall be
allowed as specialization from the same department. The minimum additional Credits for such
areas shall be in the range of 18-20 (including credit transferred from the SWAYAM platform) and
the same shall be mentioned in the degree certificate, as specialization in that particular area. For
example, doing extra credits for Cyber Security in Computer Science and Engineering shall earn
B.E./B.Tech. (Hons.) Computer Science and Engineering with specialization in Cyber Security.
53
--- Page 70 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii. | Minor specialization may be allowed in any Undergraduate Degree Courses where a student of
another Department shall take the minimum additional Credits in the range of 18-20 and get a
degree with a minor from another Department.
iii. AICTE approval is not required for offering Minor Degree/Hons. in any such area, however the
criteria is “Minor Degree or Hons. will cumulatively require additional 18 to 20 credits in the
specified area in addition to the credits essential for obtaining the Undergraduate Degree in
Major Discipline (i.e. 160 credits)”.
iv. The Institutions/ Universities shall adopt the following nomenclature while offering the Hons. in
Emerging/ Multidisciplinary/ Region Specific Areas as mentioned in Annexure-11.
6.8 The “Maximum Intake Allowed” in a new Technical Institution offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/ Post
Diploma Certificate/ Undergraduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall be as
per the Table 1.3 (Chapter 1) of the Approval Process Handbook.
6.9 The Council shall permit the Introduction/ Continuation of NRI/ OCI /FN/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries seats ONLY in the Courses conducted in regular mode (not permitted in ODL/OL mode courses).
6.10 The Courses offered in the timings of Regular Shift and Flexible Timings shall be considered as
Courses conducted on Regular /face to face Mode. The Institutions shall have to fulfill all facilities such as
Infrastructure, Faculty and other requirements to offer the Courses in regular mode as per the norms specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.
6.11 As per the UGC/AICTE regulation and AICTE (Credit Framework for online learning course through SWAYAM)
Regulations, 2016 as amended from time to time time, 40% of the courses may be offered in a particular
Programme through SWAYAM/ MOOCs platform.
6.12 Institutes having less Enrolment/ Poor Academic Performance
a. Institutions having less enrolment
i. Institutions having Course(s) in which admissions are less than 30% of the “Approved Intake”
continuously for the preceding 5 years , and if in the following year, the admitted student strength
does not exceed 50% of the “Approved Intake” in the course(s) by filling vacant seats through lateral
entry, then the Council shall reduce the intake by 50%, in such Course(s) in the current Academic
Year.
ii. In the Courses approved by the Council, if the Institution fails to admit the students/ not started the
Course(s) due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State Government/ UT
requirements in the year of establishment, the same shall be informed to the Council, else ALL the
Courses shall be considered for implementing the above Clause.
iii. The Institution falling under this category need not apply for restoration in the next Academic Year
and the Intake shall be automatically reinstated by the Council, if the enrolment becomes more than
30% based on the student enrolment data provided by the Institution. Also, such Institutions shall be
eligible to apply for other categories listed under Chapter II/ Il of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. Institutions having poor academic performance: Institutes having poor academic performance in
University/Board examinations, a joint decision of respective affiliating University/Board along with
AICTE shall be taken. The Institute with poor academic performance shall be given a warning to improve
the academic performance of the students within 2 years.
6.13 Admission to Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s)
a. Lateral Entry to Second Year Diploma/ Undergraduate Degree Course(s) as applicable in
Annexure-8 shall be permissible up to a maximum of 10% of the “Approved Intake” which shall be
over and above, (supernumerary) of the “Approved Intake”, plus the unfilled vacancies of the First year
as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
54
--- Page 71 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.14
b. Any Foreign National /NRI obtained Diploma in a Foreign Institution (having an equivalency
Certificate issued by the Association of Indian Universities) or Diploma in an Indian Institution
shall also be eligible for Lateral Entry into the Second Year Undergraduate Degree Course. The
Institutions having approval for the supernumerary seats in such Course(s) as per Clause 2.9
of the Approval Process Handbook are ONLY eligible to admit the Foreign Nationals as per the
norms, else the Institution shall apply for the same on AICTE Web Portal. However, the total Foreign
Nationals admitted under supernumerary seats and the Lateral Entry shall not exceed the 15% of the
“Approved Intake” in an Academic year.
c. The Institution applied for Closure (if the same is under process/ approved for Progressive Closure) are
eligible for admission of candidates under Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year.
d. The Institutions under “No Admission” category are not eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the
current Academic Year,
e. Institutions applied for the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and vice-versa/
Conversion of Women’s Institution to Co-ed Institution and vice-versa and approved for the
conversion are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry as per the approval of the previous
Academic Year.
f. Vacant seats arising out of the students withdrawing the admission in the First Year shall also be
considered for Lateral Entry.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Faculty requirements and Cadre ratio in
Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Level as provided in the Annexure-5 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
a. The Institutions shall ensure the timely and complete payment of the salary of Faculty by Electronic
Clearing Service through Nationalized Banks. Expert Visit Committee shall ensure the Faculty
availability by their annual salary paid statements in addition to their physical presence.
b. — Thelnstitution should not demand forthe Original Degree Certificates (except for verification) from the Faculty
members at the time of joining the Institution. The Faculty members shall avoid the practice of leaving an
Institution in the middle of the semester without completing the Courses assigned to them in the Semester.
c. The Institutions shall ensure that necessary addition/deletion of faculty ID (Details in case of new faculty
who have not worked in any other AICTE approved institutions so far) on AICTE web portal within the
same month from the date of Joining/Leaving.
d. Adjunct Faculty/ Industry expert / Professor of Practice shall be appointed as per guidelines given in
Annexure 5. However, courses requiring more practical exposure are permissible (maximum) to the
extent as mentioned below:
i. For Design Courses, services of Adjunct Faculty / Industry Experts Professor of Practice can be
utilized up to 20%
ii. For Planning Courses, services of Adjunct Faculty / Industry Experts Professor of Practice can be
utilized upto 30%
iii. In all other Programmes, Institutions may avail the services of ‘Adjunct Faculty’ OR ‘Professor of
Practice (with rich Industry experience)’ up to 15% of the required faculty strength, however
number of ‘Professor of Practice’ shall not be less than 10%. Guidelines issued by UGC shall be
followed strictly in the appointment of Professor of Practice. On the similar lines of Professor of
Practice, Institutions may avail the services of Industry experts having 5 years & 8 years experience in
emerging / multidiciplinary area as Assistant Professor of Practice & Associate
Professor of Practice respectively for teaching emerging /multidiciplinary area courses
within the maximum permissible limit of 15% as mentioned above (Adjunct Faculty+Professor of
Practice Assistant Professor of Practice & Associate Professor of Practice = 15%. of total faculty
required as per SFR).
NOTE: Guidelines issued by AICTE shall be followed strictly in the appointment of Assistant
Professor of Practice & Associate Professor of Practice.
55
--- Page 72 ---
Approval Process Handbook
e. In order to offer Quality Technical Education, all the institutions need to have Regular faculty for all
the programs / courses by fulfilling Faculty student's ratio & Cadre ratio as prescribed by AICTE from
time to time. However, the Institutions may avail the services of contractual faculty under extraordinary
circumstances (Court Cases etc.) ONLY for a short period.
f. For every Post Graduate Course, there should be at least one Professor with Ph.D. qualification.
If a Professor is not available, at least one Associate professor with Ph.D. qualification should be
available.
g. Faculty requirement for a Course may comprise of Faculty of Science and Humanities and other
interdisciplinary specialization depending on the University Curriculum.
h. = Number of Technical and Non-Teaching Staff depends on the Institution/ University/ concerned
Government norms.
i. Aadhaar/ PAN seeding has to be provided for the Faculty wherever applicable as per the Norms.
i- The Technical Institutions shall introduce Biometric attendance for regular Faculty members.
k. Each Institution shall have appropriate Grievance Redressal mechanism/ Internal Committee (IC)/ Equal
Opportunity Facilitation Cell (EOFC) to address the issues of the Faculty/Staff & Students.
6.15 The Technical Institutions shall follow Faculty Cadre and Qualifications as per:
a. All India Council for Technical EducationRegulations on Pay Scales, Service Conditions and Minimum
Qualifications for the Appointment of Teachers and Other Academic Staff such as Library, Physical
Education and Training & Placement Personnel in Technical Institutions and Measures for the
maintenance of Standards in Technical Education - (Degree) / (Diploma) Regulation, 2019 and
subsequent amendments/ new Regulations issued by AICTE from time to time.
b. — All India Council for Technical Education notification on Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/ Staff
Member Regulations, 2021 vide FNo. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated 25.03.2021
all Pay Scales related issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the concerned University
or State DTE.
6.16 Regular Faculty with prior permission from the respective employer may pursue any course under the level
(Diploma / UG / PG / PhD etc.) in regular mode outside the Office hours without availing full time depu
tation/ leave and such acquired qualification will be considered as valid for the purpose of employment /
promotion / higher studies.
NOTE: During recruitment of faculty, the institution shall have freedom to decide on the suitability of
specialization (Emerging Area /Multidisciplinary Area Courses) for the particular course,
Institution may refer to Annexure-13 for guidance.
6.17 The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Built-up requirements as provided in Annexure-3 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
a. Land required shall be with clear title in the name of the trust / society / company or on a long
term lease for a minimum period of 30 years. The Live Lease has to be at least equal to Maximum
duration of the program / course at the time of submission of application.
b. | Documents showing ownership of Land/ Building as per the provisions of Section 8 of The Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the time being in force relating to transfer of property to or by
Companies, Associations or bodies of individuals, in the name of the Applicant in the form of Registered
Settlement Deed/ Registered Sale Deed/ Irrevocable Gift Deed (Registered)/ Irrevocable Government/
Private Lease Deed (Registered) for a period of minimum 30 years.
c. It shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed Institution to mortgage the
Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of the Letter of Approval (LoA), only for raising the
resources for the purpose of development of the Technical Institution situated on that Land for improving
the employability of students.
56
--- Page 73 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.18
6.19
6.20
6.21
6.22
6.23
6.24
6.25
6.26
Plot(s) of Land under consideration shall be contiguous and shall have no obstacles such as
river, canals, rail tracks, highways, high tension lines or any such entity hampering continuity of Land.
In case, if the obstacles come later, connectivity shall be ensured and proper Safety Certificate should be
produced from Competent Authority.
The Land Use/Conversion/Classification Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as
designated by the concerned State Government/ UT.
The Building has to be constructed as per the approved Building plan. In case of any modifications done
in an existing Building, stability of the entire construction needs to be checked and also the Building Plan
needs to be re-validated, in case of major changes.
Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D (as applicable) shall be
obtained from the Competent Authority (as per standard format prescribed by the issuing Authority). For
Government Buildings, the Government Building Act, 1899 is applicable.
After the expiry of a period of thirty years from the issue of Completion Certificate, a Structural
Stability Certificate from the registered Structural Engineer for the purpose of certifying that the
Building is safe for human habitation shall be produced. Structural Stability Certificate is valid for a period
of FIVE years from the date of issue.
i. A valid Fire Safety Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority.
i- State wise Competent Authorities for issuing the Certificates pertaining to the Land/ Building
including Occupancy Certificate as given in Annexure-14 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Total Built-Up area under each sub-category such as Instructional area, Administrative area,
Ame nities area and Circulation area for each Program shall be fulfilled. Built-Up area in excess of
the total Built-up area required to run the Program(s) and Course(s) for the entire duration shall be
utilized for the student developmental activities such as Hostel, Research Park, Student Clubs
and Incubator/ Accelerator.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software,
Internet, Printers and Laboratory Equipment as provided in the Annexure-4 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
Induction training for 3 weeks and 2 weeks is mandatory for First Year UG and Diploma
students respectively as per AICTE Student Induction Policy.
Model Structure of the Curricula/ Syllabus for different Course(s) are proposed by the Council
and available in AICTE Web-Portal shall be used as a guideline and Institutions/ Universities
may adopt the same with suitable changes.
The Technical Institutions shall initiate MoUs with the Industries for the internships of the students
and report the outcomes of the same on their website. The industry with whom MoU is signed shall
be a registered industry having valid GST Number.
The PGDM Institutions shall follow Norms for PGDM Programmes as provided in the Annexure-6
of Approval Process Handbook.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Subscription of Journals as provided in the Annexure-4 of
Approval Process Handbook.
Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the establishment of a new Technical Institution is provided
in the Annexure- 3 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Contact details of AICTE are given at AICTE website www.aicte-india.org. The technical / process
related queries or grievances may be sent through CSS portal https://css.aicte-india.org/login.
57
--- Page 74 ---
6.27
6.28
6.29
6.30
6.31
6.32
6.33
6.34
6.35
6.36
6.37
6.38
Approval Process Handbook
Recommended Composition of Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) in the
Technical Institutions is given in the Annexure-17 of the Approval Process Handbook. Institutions
Deemed to be Universities shall fulfill the composition of Board of Governors/ Board of
Management (BoM) as specified by the AICTE and UGC.
The Technical Institutions may conduct the Fellow Programme in Management as specified in the
Annexure-15 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Starting other academic Course(s)/ Institutions (Technical/ Non-Technical) in the excess Built-up
area, arising out of the Courses approved for Closure, not started, etc., is permissible. However,
the Applicant has to make Material/ Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan, Site Plan, etc.
approved by the concerned Competent Authority to suit the requirements of the new Programme.
The Institutions may also conduct any academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Bodies using
existing facilities, or by creating additional facilities as per the provisions laid down in the norms and
standards of the respective Regulatory Bodies without affecting the quality of education prescribed
by both Regulatory Bodies after taking NOC from the Council. In such cases, a Scrutiny
Re-scrutiny Committee shall be conducted for the issue of NOC on receipt of Rs. 0.60 Lakh through online
TER Charges by the Applicant. The Promoter has to provide an Affidavit-12 that the Institution(s)
approved by AICTE in the Campus has/ have all the facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel
(if applicable), Faculty, etc. for meeting ALL the Courses, in addition to the proposed academic Course(s).
Ample space shall be made available for a playground in an Institution. Institutions shall provide
owned/ hired facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or
through arrangements with other adjacent Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.
Mandatory disclosures as given in the Annexure-18 shall be displayed on the website of each
Technical Institution.
The Institutions shall adopt the minimum standards and qualifications as specified in the Approval Process
Hand book for faculty. However, Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Institutions having Accreditation/
Autonomy status shall have higher than the minimum standard and qualifications specified.
Norms for Grant of Autonomy to Polytechnic Colleges is available on AICTE website.
The Institutions shall adopt the Fee fixed by the concerned State Fee Regulatory authority.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall comply with the UGC norms for Fee in Professional
Education.
The Institutions shall not directly or indirectly, demand or charge or accept, Capitation Fee or demand any
donation, by way of consideration for admission to any seat in any Course.
AICTE does not recognize the Program(s)/Course(s) in Technical Education offered through ODL/ Online
mode except in Management,Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, Logistics, Cyber
Security,Block chain and Travel & Tourism with the explicit approval of AICTE
The State Government/ UT/ Directorate of Technical Education/ Directorate of Medical Education
shall ensure that 10% of reservation for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) as per the reservation
policy for admission, operational from the Academic year 2019-20 without affecting the reservation
percentages of SC/ ST/ OBC/ General. However, this would not be applicable in the case of
Minority Institutions referred to the Clause (1) of Article 30 of Constitution of India. Further, the
implementation of 10% EWS reservation in the private unaided-Institutions may be considered
based on the relevant policies of the respective state governments. The intake in these institutions shall
be 1.25 times of the existing intake of respective categories in these institutions.
NOTE: EWS vacant seats shall be considered for the Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s) with the same
reservation policy for admission.
Supernumerary Seats in AICTE Approved Institutions as per MoE Guidelines.
58
--- Page 75 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.39
6.40
6.41
6.42
Supernumerary seats (25 Nos.) are granted by the Council, for the Institutions falling under the
Centrally Supported Scheme of “Upgrading existing Polytechnics to integrate Persons with Disability
(PWD) in the mainstream of Technical and Vocational Education”.
Concession for the wards of Kashmiri Migrants and Kashmiri Pandit / Kashmiri Hindu Families
(Non- Migrants) living in Kashmir valley for admission in Higher Educational Institutions (as per MoE
directives: FNo. 3-4/2017-NER, Dated: 15th October, 2019). This is in addition to PM-USPY
supernumerary seats. They are not eligible for scholarship
All the AICTE Approved Institutions /Universities shall mandatorily upload Affidavit 2 as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook on the AICTE Web-Portal in an e-stamp paper with digital signature
of the authorized signatories.
In case of any litigation pertaining to the penal action initiated by the Council for an Institution, for
the contravention of any of the relevant Regulations, such Institution shall have to apply as per
Clause 7.11 (as applicable) on AICTE Web-Portal, in the absence of any specific court order to the
contrary.
The Clause 1.5.4 of the Approval Process Handbook does not permit Self-financing Institutions to use
‘Indian’, ‘National’, etc. in the Name of the Institution. The Institutions which were already given
approval with those words shall change/ drop the word from the Name of the Institution, as the
Stakeholders may misinterpret them to be Government/ Government Aided Institutions. If any Institution
(other than Government/ Government Aided) continues to use ‘Indian’, ‘National’, etc. in the Name of the
Institution, the Council shall remove such words while issuing EoA.
Tuition Fee Waiver (TFW) Scheme
a. This scheme shall be applicable to all approved Technical Institutions offering Diploma, Post
Diploma, Under Graduate Programme(s) in Engineering and Technology, Computer Applications,
Planning, Applied Arts and Crafts, Design Management Programme(s) and Lateral Entry provisions of
these Programme(s).
b. | The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council.
c. Requirements and Eligibility
i Student’s parents annual income from all sources does not exceed Rs. 8.00 Lakh.
ii The Waiver is limited to the Tuition Fee as approved by the State Level Fee Committee for
Self Financing Institutions and by the Government for the Government/ Government aided
Institutions. All other Fees except Tuition Fee shall have to be paid by the beneficiary.
d. Admission Procedure
i Under this Scheme, up to a maximum of 5% of “Approved Intake” per Course shall be
available for this admission. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature. These supernumer
ary seats shall be available only to such Course(s) in an Institution, where a minimum of 50% of
“Approved Intake” are filled up in the last Academic year.
ii The Competent Authority to effect this admission is the State Government/ UT or its
designated authority.
iii In the event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to any
other category of candidates.
iv The State Admission Authority shall invite applications under this category; make a
separate merit list for this category and effect admission on the basis of the merit list
so generated.
v The Institutions shall publish all the details of this scheme in their Brochure and Web site.
59
--- Page 76 ---
Approval Process Handbook
vi | Competent Authority for admission shall submit a separate list of the students admitted under this
category to the Institution to which they are admitted for compliance.
vii A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to change the
Institution/ Course under any circumstances.
viii The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates on their Web site for
information to the students and other stakeholders.
6.43 Supernumerary seats for the Union Territories J&K and Ladakh under Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar
Shiksha Protsahan Yojana (PM-USPY)
a. This scheme shall be applicable to selected approved Technical Institutions having NIRF ranking and
offering Bachelor Programme(s). Diploma holders in Engineering are eligible for Lateral Entry under
the provisions of these Programme(s).
b. 2 seats per Course shall be available for these admission with the maximum of 10 seats per
Institution. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature and shall be available to such Course(s) in
an Institution.
c. | The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council subject to the changes
suggested by the Inter-Ministerial Committee of MoE from time to time.
d. Requirements and Eligibility
i All students of J&K and Ladakh are eligible for seats under this scheme.
ii The student passed Higher Secondary Examination (12th Std.) from the schools located in J&K
and Ladakh.
iii Student’s parents annual income from all sources does not exceed Rs. 8.00 Lakh.
e. Admission Procedure
i. AICTE shall invite applications under this category, make a separate merit list for this category
and effect admission based on the merit list as generated through Counselling or otherwise as
decided from time to time.
ii. In the event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to any
other category of Applicants.
iii. A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to change the
Institution/ Course under any circumstances without permission from AICTE.
6.44 Supernumerary seats for Gifted Children’s
a. This scheme shall be applicable to AICTE approved Technical Institutions offering Bachelor
Programme(s) in Technical Courses.
b. Two (2) seats per College/Institute shall be available for these admission. These seats shall be
supernumerary in nature.
60
--- Page 77 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.45
6.46
©
Requirements and Eligibility
Students meeting eligibility criteria as defined in the scheme guideline document available on AICTE
website: https://www.aicte-india.org/ (Gifted Child Scheme under announcement) are eligible for
seats under this schemed.
Admission Procedure
Admission Procedure for Gifted Children shall be as per Clause 6.43 (e).
Fee Refund Policy
In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected from the student,
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) shall be
refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions to retain the School/ Institution Leaving
Certificates in original.
In case, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the vacated seat is consequently filled
by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must refund the Fee collected
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) and
proportionate deductions of monthly Fee and hostel rent, where applicable.
The last date for withdrawal of PGDM admission for the purpose of refund of fee shall be as per the last date
mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
In case the vacated seat is not filled, the Institution should refund the Security Deposit and return the original
documents.
The Institution should not demand Fee for the subsequent years from the students cancelling their admission
at any point of time. Fee refund along with the return of Certificates should be completed within 7 days.
Release of Security Deposit
a. Procedure
The Trust/ Society’ Company shall upload/ submit the following documents on AICTE
Web- Portal for the release of the FDR/ RTGS.
i. Application/ request letter of the Institution for FDR/ RTGS release.
ii. — Affidavit 6 with details of the Institution and Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, FDR/ RTGS
details (as per the standard format)
iii. | Copy of FDR to be released, in a corpus fund made by RPGF, copy(s) of the Demand Draft (if any)
submitted to AICTE for creation of RPGF/ Online payment proof for Security Deposit.
iv. Copy of LoA /EoA (Latest).
Clearance from Public Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC), Vigilance Cell and Other Cells/Bureaus (Grants
released to the Institutions) of AICTE are required for the release of the FDR.
In case of FDR/ RPGF, upon clearance from all the above, NOC shall be issued to the Institution by the
Approval Bureau at AICTE.
In case of RTGS, the sanction order shall be issued by the Council.
If an Institution has any financial embezzlement with Government Bodies/ Banks, then Security
Deposit shall not be released till the NOC from such body is received.
In case an Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company violates the Security Deposit related norms, the
Council shall initiate appropriate penal action.
61
--- Page 78 ---
Approval Process Handbook
For the Institutions approved by AICTE and later converted into a Private University/Institution Deemed
to be University by appropriate State/ Central Act, the release of Security Deposit shall be subject to no
pending Complaints or Disciplinary Proceedings against such Institutions in addition to the submission of
the above documents.
For the Institutions approved for Progressive Closure (Institutional/Program specific), Security Deposit
(as applicable) shall be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company, subject to the
submission of a Certificate from the affiliating University/Board stating that no students are studying in
the Institution. Such a Certificate is not needed, if the Security Deposit is already matured.
In case of grant of approval to the merger of Institutions, Security Deposit of the Child Institution(s) shall
be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company, subject to the submission of a Certificate
from the affiliating University/Board stating that no students are studying in the Institution.
SECTION B: ESSENTIAL AND DESIRABLE REQUIREMENTS FOR TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS
6.47
The Technical Institutions shall follow the below mentioned Essential and Desirable requirements:
Essential Requirements for Technical Institution
Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education notified
Regulation for prevention and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide
No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated 01.07.2009) and UGC Regulation issued in this regard.*
Structure of Anti Ragging Committee: Every Institution/ University including Institution Deemed
to be University imparting Technical Education shall constitute a Committee to be known as the
Anti-Ragging Committee to be nominated and headed by the Head of the Institution, and consisting of
representatives of Civil and Police Administration, Local Media, Non-Government Organizations involved in
youth activities, representatives of Faculty members, representatives of parents, represen tatives of students
belonging to the freshers’ category as well as senior students, non-teaching staff and shall have a diverse
mix of membership in term of Level as well as gender.
Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging: In view of the directions of the Honorable Supreme
Court in SLP No. 24295 of 2006 dated 16-05-2007 and in Civil Appeal number 887 of 2009,
dated 08-05-2009, to prohibit, prevent and eliminate the scourge of ragging, in exercise of
the powers conferred under Section 23 read with Section 10 (b), (g), (p) and (g) of AICTE Act,
1987, the All India Council for Technical Education has notified Regulations for prevention and
prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009
dated 01.07.2009 available on AICTE Web-Portal hitp:/ www.aicte-india.org/ anti.htm>download. All
AICTE approved Technical Institutions have to comply with the provisions made in the above Regulations.
Any violation of above AICTE Regulations for the prevention and prohibition of ragging, shall call for
punitive action against erring Institutions as per the provisions made in the above said Regulations.
The Institutions shall have to step up Anti-Ragging mechanism by way of adequate publicity
through various mediums:
i Constitution of Anti-Ragging Committee and Anti Ragging Squad;
ii Setting up of Anti-Ragging Cell;
ili Installing of CCTV cameras at vital points;
iv Anti-Ragging Workshops;
v Updating all Web sites with Nodal Officers complete details, alarm bells etc.;
vi Regular interaction and counselling with the students;
vii Identification of trouble-triggers;
62
--- Page 79 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.48
viii. Mention of Anti-Ragging warning in the Institution’s prospectus and information Booklets/
Brochures shall be ensured; and
ix Surprise inspection of hostels, student accommodation, canteens, rest cum recreational rooms,
toilets, bus-stands and any other measures which would augur well in preventing/ quelling
ragging and any uncalled-for behavior / incident shall be undertaken.
c. Students in distress due to ragging related incidents can call the National Anti-Ragging Helpline No.
1800-180- 5522 (24x7 Toll Free) or e-mail: helpline@antiragging.in.
d. The Institution approved by AICTE may be requested to hold Workshops and Seminars on eradication of
ragging in higher Educational Institutions. They may be requested to display Anti Ragging posters at all
prominent places such as Admission Centre, Departments, Library, Canteen, Hostel, Common facilities
etc. The size of posters should be 8’x6’.
e. The Institution may be requested to submit an online compliance of Anti-Ragging Regulations on curbing
the menace of ragging in the Technical Institutions, 2009 at www.antiragging.in.
f. Institutions may be requested to make it compulsory for each student and every parent to submit an
online undertaking every academic year at www.antiragging.in and www.amanmovement.org.
g. Further, the attention of all the Institutions may also beinvited to the Third amendment to UGC
Regulations dated 29th June, 2016 expanding the definition of ragging by including the following:
“3 (i) Any act of physical or mental abuse (including bullying and exclusion) targeted at another
student (fresher or otherwise) on the ground of color, race, religion, caste, ethnicity, gender (including
transgender), sexual orientation, appearance, nationality, regional origins, linguistic, identity, place of
birth, place of residence or economic background”.
Establishment of Internal Committee (IC) (As per Section 4 All India Council for Technical Education (Gender
Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees and Students and
Redressal of Grievances in Technical Institutions) Regulations, 2016 vide No. FAICTE/ WH/2016/01dated
10th June, 2016 *
a. Every Technical Institution shall Publicly notify the provisions against sexual harassment and ensure
their wide- dissemination.
b. Mention about the penalty and consequences of sexual harassment on Institution’s Website,
prospectus and display prominently and make all sections of the institutional community aware of the
information on the mechanism put in place for Redressal of complaints pertaining to sexual
harassment, contact details of members of Internal Complaints Committee, complaints procedure and
so on.
c. | Organise Training Programmes or as the case may be, workshops for the officers, functionaries,
faculty and students, to sensitize them and ensure knowledge and awareness of the rights,
entitlements and responsibilities enshrined in the Act and under these regulations.
d. | Organise regular orientation or training Programs for the members of the IC to deal with complaints,
steer the process of settlement or conciliation, etc., with sensitivity.
e. Act decisively against all gender based violence perpetrated against employees and students of all
sexes recognising that primarily women employees and students and some male students and students
of the third gender are vulnerable to many forms of sexual harassment and humiliation and exploitation.
f. Every Technical Institution shall constitute an Internal Committee (IC) with an inbuilt mechanism for
gender sensitization against sexual harassment. The IC shall have the following composition:
iJ A Presiding Officer who shall be a woman Faculty member employed at a senior Level (not below
a_ Professor in case of a University, and not below an Associate Professor in case of an Institution)
at the Educational Institution, nominated by the Executive Authority.
63
--- Page 80 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii. Two Faculty members and two non-teaching employees, preferably committed to the cause of
women or who have had experience in social work or have legal knowledge, nominated by the
Executive Authority.
iii. | Three students (comprising of at least one girl student) of Pre-Final/Final year at Undergraduate/
Diploma Level Institution, as the case may be One member from amongst Non-government
Organisation or Associations committed to the cause of women or a person familiar with the
issues relating to sexual harassment, nominated by the Executive Authority
iv. At least one-half of the total members of the IC shall be women.
v. Persons in senior positions such as Chairperson/ Secretary of the Society, Principal/ Director of
the Institution, etc. shall not be the members of the ICs in order to ensure autonomy of their
functioning.
vi. The term of office of the members of the IC shall be for a period of three years. Institutions may
also employ a system whereby one-third of the members of the IC may change every year
g. All Technical Institutions approved by AICTE shall upload the Annual Report containing the
following details by 30th June of the Calendar Year:
i. Number of complaints of sexual harassment received in the year
ii. | Number of orientation or training Programmes carried out for the members of the IC to deal with
complaints
iii. | Number of complaints disposed of during the year
iv. | Number of cases pending for more than 90 days
v. Number of workshops or awareness Programme carried out for the officers, functionaries, faculty
and students to sensitize them against sexual harassment
vi. _ Nature of action taken by the Technical Institution against the perpetrator.
6.49 Establishment of Committee for SC/ ST (As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 of 1989, dated 11.09.1989)*
a. Committee shall consist of five members, out of which at least 2 members shall be SC/ST and one
member shall be a woman.
6.50 Establishment of Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism as specified in the Approval Process Handbook*
as well as the Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution. Appointment of Om budsman by the
University. (As per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students)
Regulation, 2019 vide F. No.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019) *All India Council
for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/ Staff Member) Regulations, 2021 vide
ENo.1- 103/ AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021dated 25.03.2021.
a. Grievance Redressal Mechanism: In order to provide opportunities for redressal of certain
grievances of students already enrolled in any _ institution, as well as for those
seeking admission to such institutions, AICTE has notified All India Council for Technical Education
(Redressal of Grievance of Students) Regulations, 2019 vide F No. 1-101/PGRC/AICTE/
Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019 for establishment of grievance redressal mechanism for all AICTE
approved Technical Institutions. Non-compliance of the above Regulations shall call for punitive action.
b. Redressal Cell (GRC) for Faculty/Staff: Implementation of the above shall be in line with norms
prescribed in All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students)
Regulations, 2019 vide F No. 1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019 available on
AICTE website.
64
--- Page 81 ---
Approval Process Handbook
c. Student Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC)
Vi.
vii.
viii.
ix.
Acomplaint from an aggrieved student relating to the institution shall be addressed to t
Student Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC).
he Chairperson,
Every AICTE approved institution shall constitute Student Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC)
with the following composition, namely:
Principal of the College- Chairperson;
Three senior members of the teaching faculty to be nominated by the Principal as Members and out
of three one member shall be female and other from SC/ST/OBC category;
A representative from among students of the College to be nominated by the Principal based on
academic merit/excellence in sports/performance in co-curricular activities- Special
The term of the members and the special invitee shall be of two years.
The quorum for the meeting including the Chairperson, but excluding the special
three.
Invitee.
invitee, shall be
In considering the grievances before it, the SGRC shall follow principles of natural justice.
The SGRC shall send its report with recommendations, if any, to the concerned institution and a copy
thereof to the aggrieved student, within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of the complaint.
Any student aggrieved by the decision of the SGRC may prefer an appeal to the Ombudsperson,
within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of such decision.
d. Appointment of OMBUDSMAN by the University
vi.
vii.
viii.
Each affiliating University, Technical University, Private University, Deemed to be
University shall
appoint Ombudsperson for redressal of grievances of students under the UGC (Redress of
Grievances of Students) Regulations, 2019.
There shall be one or more part-time functionaries designated as Ombudsperson to hear, and
decide on, appeals preferred against the decisions of the SGRCs.
For institutions which are offering diploma level course(s) and are affiliated to the Board of
Technical Education (BTE), the concerned Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) shall appoint an
Ombudsperson for redressal of grievances of students.
For institutions which are not affiliated to any University and offering Diploma, Post
Graduate Certificate, Post Graduate Diploma Course(s) in Management, Computer
Diploma, Post
Applications
& Travel and Tourism, the Council shall appoint an Ombudsperson for redressal of grievances of
students.
The Ombudsperson shall be a Retired District Judge or a retired Vice Chancel
Institution of eminence).
or in the course of his tenure as Ombudsperson, be in a conflict of interest wit!
where his/her personal relationship, professional affiliation or financial interest may
reasonably appear to compromise, the independence of judgement toward the Insti
The Ombudsperson shall be appointed for a period of three years or until he or
or or Professor
(who has worked as Dean/HOD and 10 years’ experience as Professor at State/Central Universities/
The Ombudsperson shall not, at the time of appointment, during one year before appointment,
h the Institution
compromise or
tution.
she attains the
age of 70 years, whichever is earlier, from the date of assuming office, and shal
be eligible for
reappointment for another one term for the same State or region, as the case may be.
For conducting the hearings, the Ombudsperson shall be paid a sitting fee, per diem, in accordance
with the norms fixed by the Council, and shall, in addition, be eligible for reimbursement of the
expenditure incurred on conveyance.
65
--- Page 82 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ix. The State Government, in the case of an Ombudsperson of a State, and the Council (for Council
appointed Ombudsperson), may remove the Ombudsperson from office, on charges of proven
misconduct or misbehaviour as defined under these Regulations.
x. No order of removal of Ombudsperson shall be made except after an inquiry made in this regard
by a person not below the rank of judge of the High Court in which a reasonable opportunity of
being heard is given to the Ombudsperson.
xi. An institution shall furnish, prominently, on its website and in its prospectus, all relevant
information in respect ofthe Students Grievance Redressal Committee(s) coming in its purview, and the
Ombudsperson for the purpose of appeals.
Functions of Ombudsperson:
i. The Ombudsperson shall hear appeals from an aggrieved student(s), only after the student has
availed all other remedies provided under these Regulations.
ii. | While issues of malpractices in the conduct of examination or in the process of evaluation may be
referred to the Ombudsperson, no appeal or application for revaluation or re-totalling of answer
sheets from an examination, shall be entertained by the Ombudsperson unless specific irregularity
materially affecting the outcome of specific instance of discrimination is indicated.
iii. |The Ombudsperson may avail assistance of any person, as amicus curiae, for hearing complaints
of alleged discrimination.
iv. |The Ombudsperson shall make all efforts to resolve the grievances within a period of 30 days of
receiving the appeal from the aggrieved student(s).
g. Procedure for Redressal of Grievances by Ombudspersons and Student Grievance Redressal
Committees:
i. Each institution shall, within a period of three months from the date of issue of this notification,
have an online portal where any aggrieved student may submit an application seeking redressal of
grievance.
ii. On receipt of an online complaint, the institution shall refer the complaint to the appropriate
Student Grievance Redressal Committee, along with its comments within 15 days of receipt of
complaint on the online portal.
iii. | The Student Grievance Redressal Committee, as the case may be, shall fix a date for hearing the
complaint which shall be communicated to the institution and the aggrieved student.
iv. An aggrieved person may appear either in person or authorize a representative to present his/her
case.
v. Grievances not resolved by the Student Grievance Redressal Committee shall be referred to the
Ombudsperson, within the time period provided in these Regulations.
vi. Institutions shall extend co-operation to the Ombudsperson or the Student Grievance
Redressal Committee, in early redressal of grievances; and failure to do so may be reported by the
Ombudsperson to the Council, which shall take action in accordance with the provisions of these
Regulations.
vii. The Ombudsperson shall, after giving reasonable opportunities of being heard to both parties, on
the conclusion of proceedings, pass such order, with reasons therefore as may be deemed fit to
redress the grievance and provide such relief as may be appropriate to the aggrieved student.
viii. The Institution, as well as the aggrieved student, shall be provided with copies of the order under
the signature of the Ombudsperson, and the institution shall place it for general information on its
website.
ix. The Institution shall comply with the recommendations of the Ombudsperson; and the
Ombudsperson shall report to the Council any failure on the part of the institution to comply with the
recommendations.
66
--- Page 83 ---
Approval Process Handbook
x. The Ombusperson may recommend appropriate action against the complainant, where a complaint
is found to be false or frivolous.
h. — Consequences of Non-Compliance:
The Council shall in respect of any Technical institution, which wilfully contravenes or repeatedly
fails to comply with the recommendation of the Ombudsperson or the Student Grievance Redressal
Committee, as the case may be, proceed to take one or more of the following actions, namely:
i. Withdrawal of approval granted to the Technical Institution;
ii. | Withdrawal of declaration of fitness or entitlement to receive grants or financial assistance from
the Council;
iii. withholding any grant allocated to the Technical Institution;
iv. Declaring the institution ineligible for consideration for any assistance under any of the general or
special assistance programs of the Council;
v. Informing the general public, including potential candidates for admission, through a notice
displayed prominently in suitable media and posted on the website of Council, declaring that the
institution does not possess the minimum standards for redressal of grievances;
vi. | Recommend to the affiliating University for withdrawal of affiliation, in case of a University
affiliated institution or DTE affiliated institution;
vii. Such other action may be deemed necessary and appropriate against an institution for
non- compliance.
viii. Provided that no action shall be taken by the Council under these Regulations, unless the
institution
has been given an opportunity to explain its position and an opportunity of being heard has been
provided to it.
6.51 Establishment of Institution’s Innovation Council (IIC)
a. To create an enabling ecosystem for Innovation and Entrepreneurship in educational institutions, MoE’s
Innovation Cell and AICTE are encouraging all higher technical institutions to establish Institution's
Innovation Council (IIC) in their campuses. The 1st step towards establishing an IIC is to register in the
IIC portal https://iic.mic.gov.in/signup followed by formation and function of the council. In the AICTE’s
annual approval process, establishment of IIC in HEI is an essential item, for which all participating
institutes are required to upload the copy of the IIC establishment certificate and IIC registration number.
b. Institutions with a functional IICs in campus can download the establishment certificate available at
<About My Institute>, <My Profile>, <Certificates> in the Institute’s IIC login page for the above
purpose. If an institution has not yet established an IIC, the head of the institute can register for an IIC
at https://iic.mic.gov.in/signup and complete the ‘My Council’ formation along with nomination for the
president to lead the IIC activities. Institute can go through the manual of IIC formation and operation at
https://iic.mic.gov.in/assets/html/index.html. For more details about the IIC, visit https:// iic.mic.gov.in/.
6.52 The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the physically challenged students
and elderly persons comprising of Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others as per the guidelines and space
standards for Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons by CPWD, Ministry of
Urban Development, Government of India (Refer Handbook on Barrier free and Accessibility http://
cpwd.gov.in) and National Building Code.
6.53 Other Essential Requirements of a Technical Instituition
a. | Compliance of the Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) as per MoE directives, (Applicable for Standalone
Institutions, PGDM/PGCM and Universities).
b. Safety and Security measures in the Campus as prescribed by the concerned Authority.
cd Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 at the Institution.
d. Digital payment for all financial transactions as per MoE directives.
67
--- Page 84 ---
Approval Process Handbook
e Display of information submitted to AICTE (including the accreditation status and Board of
Governors) along with the Copies of AICTE approvals (LoA and EoA of subsequent years) obtained since
inception of the Institution till date shall be placed on the Web site of the Institution.
f. Establishment of platform or hiring counsellors for seeking help and guidance w.r.t psychological
counselling related to Mental Health for Students, faculty and non-teaching faculty.
g. — Establishment of 24x7 women helpline number and a security system in the campus for providing safety
to students and female faculty and non-teaching faculty.
h. First Aid, Medical and counselling facilities
i. Potable Water Supply and outlets for drinking water at strategic locations.
i- Sewage Disposal System - Waste Management and environment improvement measures to ensure a
sustainable Green Campus
k. Students Safety Insurance and Group Accident Policy for the Employee.
I. As per NEP. every Institution shall have inbuilt mechanism for Social and Emotional Learning-
A crucial component of Education.
m. Internship shall be made compulsory for all final year students of AICTE approved Institutes/
Universities.
n. All the institutions shall encourage the students to study some of the electives mandatorily through
SWAYAM (MOOCS Platform.
o. The AICTE approved institutions shall evolve a mechanism for earning credits through ‘Skilling’ based
courses offered by Skill India, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship OR any other leading
skilling platforms in order to improve their skill sets and employability.
p. _ Institution-Industry Cell.
q. Language Laboratory (for institutions having Diploma and Degree Programs)
*Appointment of Committees/ IQAC/ Grievance Mechanism should be made before
commencement of the session, however, an Affidavit 2 to that effect need to be submitted by the
new Technical Institution at the time of inspection by Expert Visit Committee
** An Affidavit to be uploaded on the Portal for the compliance of Implementation of Internship Policy
of AICTE.
NOTE: The above mentioned documents need to be uploaded before downloading the
EoA. The Council shall verify their implementation at any point of time.
6.54 Desirable Requirements of a Technical Institution
a. — Implementation of student Induction Programme***
b. — Implementation of One Student One Laptop Scheme.
c. Facilitate teachers for undergoing Pedagogical training through NITTT Guidelines
d. Applied for membership of National Digital Library
e. — Facility to watch MOOCs through SWAYAM & SWAYAM PRABHA
f. Fabrication facility Laboratory (FABLAB)/ AICTE-IDEA LAB/Tinkering Laboratory/ Innovation Laboratory
g. Availability of at least ONE Smart Class Room per Department
h. Installation of grid connected solar rooftops/ Power Systems
68
--- Page 85 ---
Approval Process Handbook
i. Course(s) taken through duly recognized MOOCs shall be used as Supplementary Course(s)
i- General Insurance provided for assets against fire, burglary and other calamities
k. Green and eco-friendly campus which focuses on energy efficiency by preserving natural resources for
healthy living and a good learning environment.
Availability of quality sanitary napkins through sanitary napkin vending machines and ensuring safe and
environmentally friendly disposal of used sanitary napkins through sanitary napkin incinerator.
m. — Rainwater Harvesting.
** “An Undertaking to be uploaded on the Portal that the Institution shall possess an UHV
Induction Programme trained Faculty for every 20 newly joined students before AY 2024-25.
NOTE-1: An Undertaking to be uploaded on the Portal that the Internal Assessment & Laboratory
Work shall be carried out following AICTE Exam Reforms and all the existing Faculty shall be
trained for the same.
2: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the approval (including academic) related activities as
notified by the Council from time to time is binding on all the AICTE Approved Institutions /
Universities.
3: In an extraordinary circumstance, to implement the withdrawal of approval in the current Academic
Year, students admitted shall be shifted to the nearby AICTE approved Institutions in consultation
with the concerned University/ Board/ State Government/ UT.
All AICTE & UGC Regulations /Notifications issued from time to time are binding on
all the Institutes/ Universities (as applicable).
Any norms & requirements not specified in this APH but notified a letter shall come
into effect from the date of notification (unless & otherwise specified).
69
--- Page 86 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-VII
Penal Actions on Violation of Norms
71
7.2
7.3
Introduction
a. An Institution offering any Programme/ Course in Technical Education in violation of Regulations/
Approval Process Handbook, shall be liable for appropriate Penal action including fine/no admission/
reduction in “Approved Intake”/ Withdrawal of Approval/ criminal action by the Council against defaulting
Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated Individuals/ the Institution, as the case may be.
b. In case of Withdrawal of Approval of the Institution, the Technical Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company
shall apply afresh for approval ONLY after completion of two Academic Years with a different name
as per the procedure defined in the Approval Process Handbook.
c. Institution whose approval has been withdrawn for the current Academic Year admitted students of the
same shall be redistributed to other AICTE approved Institutions in the jurisdiction of the affiliating
University/ Board by the Competent Authority of the respective State Government/ UT. However,
AICTE approval given to the Course(s) in the previous Academic Year(s), if any, to such Institution shall
continue and students admitted against the courses shall be treated as AICTE approved Course(s) only.
NOTE: If any of the information mentioned in the Affidavit is proved as false, penal action shall be
initiated against the Deponent.
Un-approved Technical Programmes/ Course(s) offered by an Institution
If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes/ Course(s) without the approval of the Council,
it shall be declared as unapproved Institution and the Council shall inform respective State Government/
UT to initiate appropriate penal, civil/ criminal action against such defaulting Institutions/ Trust/ Society/
Company/ Associated Individuals as the case maybe. AICTE will issue Public Notice from time to time
regarding un-approved Institutions.
Penal Action against the Institution in case of Violation of the AICTE Norms and Regulations
The Institution /University shall be liable for any one or more of the following punitive/penal actions by
the Council in case of Violation of ANY of the AICTE Norms and Regulations.
a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
c. No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
e. Withdrawal of graded Autonomy.
f. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution/University
g. Five times the total Fee collected for complete duration of the course per student shall be levied
against each excess admission as fine (Applicable to Clause 7.4 (g) & 7.4 (h))
h. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
70
--- Page 87 ---
Approval Process Handbook
7.4 Institutions violating the following shall invite appropriate penal action as per Clause 7.3 :
a. Non-Submission/ Submission of Incomplete/ False/Incorrect Information/Violation of Regulatory
Provisions in Online Application for Extension of Approval while applying for Extension of Approval
b. Non-Fulfilment of Requirement of Qualified Principal/ Director
An Institution, NOT having qualified Principal/ Director for a period more than 12 months shall
be liable for penal action (s) by the Council till the regular Principal/ Director is appointed.
c. Non-Fulfilment of Faculty:Student ratio, not adhering to the Pay Scales and/or qualifications
prescribed for Faculty
i. As per All India Council for Technical Education notification (Redressal of Grievance of
Faculty/ Staff Member) Regulations, 2021 vide FNo. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021
dated 25.03.2021, all Pay Scales related Issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by
the concerned University or State DTE.
ii. In case of standalone PGDM /PGCM Institutions, AICTE shall Initiate Action through
Committee constituted by AICTE.
iii. Institutions/Universities/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities, if recommended under
Clauses above found not adhering to Pay scales or qualifications prescribed for Faculty
members for more than 12 months and not maintaining prescribed Faculty:Student ratio.
NOTE: Undertaking should be from Chairman/Secretary of Trust / Society /Company in all Faculty
Related Grievances.
d. Non-Fulfilment of Computer, Software, Laboratory Equipment, Books, Journals, Library facilities
requirements, etc.
Institutions not maintaining prescribed requirements of Computer, Software, Laboratory Equipment,
Books, Journals, Library facilities, etc. shall be liable for penal action(s).
e. Non-Fulfilment of Essential Requirements
Institutions not maintaining essential requirements as prescribed in Approval Process Handbook shall
be liable for penal action(s).
f. Non-Fulfilment of Location/ Built-up Area/ as specified in the Approval Process Handbook at the time
of year of establishment or the current Academic Year
Institutions working in a temporary location or at location not approved by the Council and Institutions
not fulfilling prescribed Built-up area requirements shall be liable for penal action(s).
g. Excess Admission
Excess admission over the “Approved Intake” shall not be allowed under any circumstances. In case
any excess admission is reported to/ noted by the Council, appropriate penal action shall be initiated
against the Institution. The Institution shall be liable for penal action(s).
h. Violation of Admission Eligibility Norms
Violation of admission eligibility norms (including transferring of non-eligible students laterally to the
approved programme) shall not be allowed under any circumstances. In case it is reported to/ noted
by the Council, appropriate penal action shall be initiated against the Institution / University. The
Institution / University shall be liable for penal action(s).
71
--- Page 88 ---
Approval Process Handbook
i. Charging Excess Fee than the Fee Prescribed by the Concerned State/ Fee Regulatory Committee
The Institutions shall have to announce all Fees such as Tuition Fee, Examination Fee, etc. on their
Web Site transparently and adhere to the same strictly. No Technical Institution shall collect any other
Fee (Payment/ Amount) from the students, in addition to the Fee fixed by the State/ Fee Regulatory
Committee. If any Institution does not follow the said guidelines, the Institution shall be liable for
penal action(s). Also, the excess Fee collected shall be refunded to the student.
nstitutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical/online verification of Infrastructural
facilities/ Institutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/
Form D/ Barrier free environment.
nstitutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical verification of Infrastructural facilities/
nstitutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D/
Barrier free environment, shall be liable for penal action (s).
k. nstitutions demanding for the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at the time of
joining the Institution.
n the event, a Faculty member intends to leave the Institution in the middle of the Semester without
sufficient notice to the Institution to make a suitable alternate arrangement, faculty may complete the
syllabus of the Course(s) allotted to him/ her keeping in view of the academic interests of students. In
any case, the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members shall not be retained by the
nstitution.
nstitutions Deemed to be Universities not having registration of ABC shall be liable for
penal action(s).
m. Violation of norms of admission by the Institutions/ Universities conducting PGDM/ PGCM
Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having registration of ABC or Institutions offering PGDM Course(s)
in Regular or ODL/OL mode not uploading student enrollment data and list of students completed the
Course(s) successfully along with their CGPA/ Percentage of marks in the AICTE Web-Portal.
Norms for conducting PGDM/ PGCM Courses shall be as per Annexure-6 of the Approval Process
Handbook. If any Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University fails to comply with any of the
conditions specified therein/any violation in the admission procedure specified in the Approval
Process Handbook for the PGDM/ PGCM Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having registration of ABC
or Institutions offering PGDM Course(s) not uploading student enrollment data in the AICTE
Web-Portal, shall be liable for penal action (s).
n. University / Institution shall be liable to withdrawal of Approval in case of running Programme(s)/
Course(s) with partial approval of AICTE. University shall be liable to withdrawal of approval in case
of violation of regulatory provisions (e.g. Running Integrated/Dual programme/course which requires
approval from different regulatory bodies). Strict Penal action also shall be initiated against the
institution.
7.5 Violation of Norms in case of Collaboration and Twinning Programme
a. If a University/ Institution fails to comply with any of the conditions as contained in the Approval
Process Handbook, the Council shall withdraw the approval of the Twinning Programme granted to
such University/ Institution to offer their Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/
Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree in India and forbid such Foreign University/ Institution
to either open Centers or enter into any Collaborative arrangement with any University/ Institution in
India.
b. The Council shall also inform the concerned agencies including Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry
of Home Affairs, RBI of such decisions and advise these agencies to take any or all of the following
measures:
72
--- Page 89 ---
Approval Process Handbook
7.6
7.7
78
79
i. Refusal/ withdrawal of grant of visa to employees/ teachers of the said Foreign University/
Institution.
ii. Stop transfer of funds outside India.
iii. Informing the Public about the withdrawal of approval of the Twinning Programme with
Foreign University/ Institution and the consequence there of.
c. Once the approval of the Twinning Programme is withdrawn, the Council shall make an attempt in
co-ordination with concerned State Government/ UT to re-allocate the students enrolled in such
Programme to other approved Institutions of the Council. The Institution shall have to return the entire
Fee collected from such students to the Institutions in which the students are accommodated.
d. Institution whose approval of Twinning programme is withdrawn, shall not be allowed to collaborate
with any other Centre/ Institution or enter into a Collaborative arrangement in India for at least next
3 years.
e. UGC norms and amendments from time to time on the subject shall be applicable.
Fee Refund Cases
Institutions not following guidelines issued by the Council regarding refund of Fee for cancellation of
admission or delaying refunds shall be liable to any one or more of the penal actions as mentioned in
Clause 7.3 by the Council.
NOTE: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the academic related activities as notified by the
Council from time to time are binding on all the AICTE Approved Universities/Institutions.
Security Deposit
In case of Institutions where FDRs are encashed before the date of maturity or not depositing the required
Security Deposit at the time of LoA, a penalty of 10% of the value of the FDR shall be imposed. However,
Institutions NOT created FDR / created FDR for lesser duration / lesser amount than prescribed at the time
of LoA have to create the same as per the Rules / Policy as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Complaints regarding the use of fake certificates of SC/ST/OBC/EWS/PwD to be investigated in time
bound manner and if found guilty, such admission should be cancelled. Further, appropriate action shall
be initiated accordingly with due intimation to AICTE.
Penalty amount shall be paid online to the Council as per the instructions.
7.10 Complaint Cases
a. All Institutions shall have Grievance Redressal mechanism as notified by the Council.
b. In case of receipt of any Complaint(s) about an Institution, the same shall be processed by Public
Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) of AICTE.
c. The verified Complaint shall be placed before a Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC) for
further necessary action. If necessary, the complainant as well as the Institute may be called to appear
before SCSC at his/ her own cost. Based on the recommendation of SCSC, a Warning or Show-Cause
Notice may be issued to the Institution or Expert Visit Committee may be conducted through
Regulation Bureau.
d. The report of the Expert Visit Committee/ Show Cause notice, if issued shall be placed before the
Standing Hearing Committee.
73
--- Page 90 ---
7.11
7.12.
7.13
Approval Process Handbook
e. Two representatives of the Institution (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Photo ID
proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents before the
Standing Hearing Committee. If necessary, the complainant may be called to appear before Standing
Hearing Committee at his/ her own cost.
f. The recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for approval.
g. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal by a detailed Speaking
Order. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall
have the right to appeal as per Clause 1.11/ Clause 2.23 of the Approval Process Handbook.
h. As per CVC guidelines, Anonymous/ Pseudonymous Complaints shall not be processed.
Procedure for Restoration against Punitive Action
a. The Applicant shall make an application for restoration on AICTE Web-Portal along with the
application for Extension of Approval of the next Academic Year.
b. The restoration is subject to Scrutiny Committee /Expert Visit Committee (as applicable) verifying all
the requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
c). The Expert Visit Committee Report shall be placed before the Standing Hearing Committee.
d. Recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for necessary Approval.
e. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall have the
right to appeal as per Clause 1.11/ Clause 2.23 of the Approval Process Handbook. The Council
shall give an opportunity for presenting its case before Standing Appellate Committee. The
recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be considered by the Council.
f. In case of restoration, Extension of Approval with restored Intake shall be uploaded on AICTE
Web-Portal, or otherwise Speaking Order shall also be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
Under extraordinary circumstances, if restoration/ Punitive action (except monetary penalty) is
approved by the Council beyond 30th April of the Calendar Year and the same shall be implemented for
the next Academic Year only in compliance with the order passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
in CA No.9048/ 2012 dated 13.12.2012.
Each Institution shall upload the number of Complaints and Grievances received and action taken in their
Web site and update AICTE through the monthly online status report. Otherwise action shall be taken against
such institutions as mentioned in the clause 7.3 above by the Council.
queay aaa aeoraonfehy: |
wecteciad fer al cae aaa |
System for generation/transmission of power through motion or continuous rotation of shafts,
wheels or wedges is called a machine.
74
--- Page 91 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CHAPTER-VIII
Do’s and Don'ts
All information related to Approval Process will be available in AICTE website; www.aicte-india.org
1.
2.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
No need to submit the hard copy of the application to the Regulation Bureau (except New Institute).
Departments under the same University shall apply with the same PID of the University.
If the Applicant/ Institution is invited to appear before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny to verify the documents/ to
present their case before the Standing Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee for compliance of
the deficiencies, the representative(s) shall also bring the documents presented to the Scrutiny/ Expert Visit
Committee to make use of the opportunity given effectively.
If an Institution intends to utilise a Building constructed earlier, the Building approvals obtained from the then
authorities shall be produced, else the approval for the same shall be obtained from the current approving
authorities.
To include new nomenclatures in the Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Degree Courses, approval
from the University/ Board, as applicable along with the Curriculum and Syllabus shall be sent to the Policy
and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE.
AICTE does NOT insist on separate boundary walls for Institutions existing in the same Campus by the same
Trust/ Society/ Company, provided the Land and Built-up norms shall be fulfilled for the Programmes/ Courses
approved.
EVC shall check the facilities only for “Approved Intake”, not based on admitted students.
Excess payment shall be refunded, not adjusted in future transactions.
TER charges are accepted only through digital payment through the Portal, Demand Draft is not accepted
under any circumstance.
Once the application is processed as per the stipulated procedure, TER charges are not refundable (other than
those mentioned in the Approval Process Handbook), even if the application is rejected.
For the release of Security Deposits through FDR/RTGS, only online applications are accepted. The status of
processing can be viewed through the portal.
Any Queries/Clarifications related to policy / technical queries (portal related) shall be sent ONLY through
CSS portal.
All the Institution of Universities are encouraged to use AICTE digital assistant for any clarification/help.
All Notifications, Circulars, Announcements, Public Notice, Corrigendums and Guidelines issued/notified
from time to time will be available in AICTE website.
All Annexures, Affidavits, Certificates & Formats will be available in AICTE website under approval
process section.
A town/nagara is defined as an area covering 1000 - 2000 yojan’s. A pattana, on the other
hand, is defined as a nagara which is on the coast and has ships/ sea faring vessels.
75
--- Page 92 ---
--- Page 93 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-1
Documents to be uploaded/submitted / shown for Setting up a
New Technical Institution
1.1 Documents to be uploaded/submitted/shown at the time of the Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny
The Applicant shall present following supporting documents in original along with one copy, duly self- attested and
other necessary information to the Scrutiny Committee. As per Affidavit 2 supporting documents other than Affidavits
shall be made and duly authenticated by the authorized signatory of Applicant or by the Head of the Institution.
vi.
vii.
viii.
xi.
xii.
Building Plan of the Institution (Certificate-2) should have been prepared by an Architect registered
with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor (Certificate-1) and approved by the Competent
Authority as designated by concerned State Government/ UT (Annexure-14). The Institution should
upload/submit two copies of Building Plan.
An Affidavit 2, on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ e-stamp paper of Rs. 100/-, duly sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.
Resolution of the Applicant Organization in Format 3.
Certificate of Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D (as
applicable) from the Competent Authority (as per standard format prescribed by the issuing
Authority). For the rest, an Affidavit on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ e-stamp paper of
Rs. 100/-, duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner,
that the same shall be produced on completion of the Building.
A valid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority.
Certificate 3 issued by the Bank Manager regarding financial status of the Applicant.
A hard copy of the complete application as uploaded to AICTE Web-Portal.
A registration document of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ PPP/ BOT indicating its members, objectives
and Memorandum of Association and Rules, duly attested/ certified by the concerned Competent
Authority.
For Standalone PGDM Institutions, details of the recommended composition of the Board of
Governors of the Institution constituted as per Annexure-17 of the Approval Process Handbook.
In the case of a Company established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013, the MoA and
Rules must contain a provision that the objective of the Company is not profit making and any surplus
earning shall be used exclusively for the purpose of development of Technical Institution.
Documents to be submitted In case of an application made with a proposal of PPP/ BOT-Resolution
of the Applicant Organization, pertaining to start a Technical Institution and allocation of Land/
Building/ funds to proposed activities in the Format 3.
Documents showing ownership of Land/ Building as per the provisions of Section 8 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the time being in force relating to transfer of property to or
by Companies, Associations or bodies of individuals, in the name of the Applicant in the form of
Registered Settlement Deed/ Registered Sale Deed/ Irrevocable Gift Deed (Registered)/ Irrevocable
Government/ Private Lease Deed (Registered) (for a period of minimum 30 years) (including
Commitment for continued lease) with at least live Lease of 5 years duration of programs at the time
of submission of application.
77
--- Page 94 ---
Approval Process Handbook
That Joint Affidavit 7 by the parties that the lease of Land is irrevocable for 30 years shall have to be given on a
Non-Judicial stamp/ e-stamp paper of Rs. 100/- duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate/Notary/Oath
Commissioner.
In case, the Land documents are in vernacular Language, notarized English translation of the documents shall be
produced.
Documents to be submitted, in case of Private Lease of Land/ Building:
Private Lease of Land
i. Original document of Private Lease registered between the Lessor and Lessee with Competent
Authority under the Registration Act (It should have a validity of 30 years as on date of the notification
issued by the Council)
ii. Land Conversion Certificate issued by the Competent Authority
iii. Title documents of the Lessor referring to its acquisition of leasehold rights through a lawful
transaction
iv. Encumbrance Certificate relating to the property on a date not later than the date of issue of
notification issued by the Council
v. Resolution of the Trust/Society/ Company, if the Lessor is either of these.
vi. In case of Sub Lease, the Lessor (then Lessee) should have the right to assign the leasehold right in the
form of a registered document.
vii. Mortgage of Land shall not be permissible.
Private Lease of Building
i. Complete Building Plan approved by the Competent Authority. In case of Multi-storied where certain
floors only are leased, then the complete floor plan shall be prepared by an Architect clearly
indicating the details along with the Complete Building Plan approved by the Competent Authority.
ii. Occupancy/ Completion Certificate relating to the property/ floors issued by the Competent Authority.
iii. Title documents of the Land referring to the acquisition/leasehold right over the said property.
iv. Lease deed registered by the Competent Authority under Registration Act.
v. A valid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority.
vi. Land Use Certificate permitting the Land to be used for Educational purpose, from the Competent
Authority along with Topo sketch/ Village Map indicating Land Survey Numbers and a copy of road
map showing location of the proposed site of the Institution.
vii. Floor Plans, sections and elevations of all proposed/ existing Buildings exclusively intended for use for
the proposed Institution at the permanent site with a table clearly mentioning all rooms, with carpet
area of each in m?, as specified in Instructional, Administrative and Amenities requirements certified
by the Architect registered with the Council of Architecture. Safety and hygiene precautions ensured
during partial occupation, if any, certified by the Architect registered with the Council of Architecture.
viii. Proof of working capital (funds) as stated in Clause 1.5.3 of the Approval Process Handbook, in the
form of either Fixed Deposits in the Bank or latest Bank Statement of Accounts maintained by the
Applicant Organization in a Nationalized Bank or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by
Reserve Bank of India, along with a Certificate issued by the Branch Manager of the Bank.
78
--- Page 95 ---
Approval Process Handbook
xi.
xii.
xiii.
Audited statement of accounts of the Applicant Organization for last three years, as may be
applicable.
Certificate regarding Minority Status, if applicable at the time of application.
Detailed Project Report (DPR).
Undertaking from the Applicant to the effect that no high tension line is passing through the Campus
including hostel. In case high tension line passes through the Campus/ hostel, a Certificate from the
Competent Authority (Electricity Board) that it shall not affect the safety of the Building/ students/
Faculty/ Staff etc. is required.
In case of Buildings constructed by Government Departments before 50 years, for Government/
Government aided Institutions/ State or Central University/ Defence Institutions where the documents
could not be submitted, a letter from the Competent Authority that the Building norms of AICTE are
fulfilled shall be produced to this effect.
1.2 Documents to be submitted at the time of Expert Visit Committee
The Applicant shall present following supporting documents in original along with one copy, duly attested by
a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner and other necessary information to the
Expert Visit Committee.
vi.
vii.
viii.
Copy of the advertisement in at least one National Daily, for recruitment of Principal/ Director and
Faculty members.
Proof of provision of Internet bandwidth in Mbps
List giving titles of Books and Volumes of each purchased for the Library.
Copy of Invoice/ Cash Memo for Equipment and Library Books.
Details of subscription of Journals as per Annexure-4 of this Approval Process Handbook.
Sanction of electrical load by electric supply provider Company.
A Certificate by an Architect, giving details of sewage disposal system, barrier free environment and
toilets created for physically challenged and all weather motorable approach roads.
Details of all other Educational Institutions run by the same Trust/ Society/ Company.
Video recording with brief outline of the Institute and its facilities (Front and Back side of the entire
Institution Building(s) Internal portion of the Class Rooms, Tutorial Rooms, Laboratories, Workshop,
Drawing Hall, Computer Centre, Library, Reading Room, Seminar Hall and all other rooms, as
mentioned in Programme wise Instructional area requirements, Internal portion of the principal’s
room, Board room, main Office, Departmental Offices, Faculty cabins/ seating arrangement and
all other rooms as mentioned in Administrative area requirements, Internal portion of toilet facilities,
boys and girls common rooms, Cafeteria and all other rooms as mentioned in Amenities area
requirements, circulation area details highlighting entrance lobby, passages, escalators, staircases
and other common areas) as required by the EVC shall be prepared in advance by Director/Principal
and Video Recording of about 30 minutes shall be uploaded on YouTube and URL link shall be
provided in the AICTE portal for advance viewing by the committee members before the EVC.
1.3 Documents to be uploaded after the issuance of LoA
1.3.1. New Technical Institutions and Existing Institutions shall comply with appointment of Faculty members
and Principal/ Director as the case may be, as per Policy regarding minimum qualifications pay
scales, norms etc., as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
79
--- Page 96 ---
1.4
1.5
1.3.2
1.3.3
1.3.4
1.3.5
1.3.6
Approval Process Handbook
For existing Institutions, applying for new programs/ courses and increase in intake/ division need
to show availability of Infrastructure facilities and faculties as per the norms to EVC
Institutions shall appoint Principal/ Director/ Teaching Staff strictly in accordance with the norms
prescribed by the Council and other Technical Supporting Staff and Administrative Staff strictly in
accordance with the methods and procedures of the concerned State Government/ UT, particularly in
case of selection procedures and selection Committees.
The information about these appointments of Staff in the prescribed Format shall be uploaded in
AICTE Web-Portal.
In no circumstance, unless the appointment of all Faculty members and other Staff is in place, the
Institutions shall start the approved Technical Course(s).
Faculty and non-teaching Staff data shall be entered as per the prescribed Format.
Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for Closure of Institution and starting of a
New Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year
1.4.1
1.4.2
1.4.3
1.4.4
1.4.5
1.4.6
No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2.
Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Closure of the Institution for
starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year/ Change of Site/
Location/ Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa/ Conversion of
Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing
nstitutions, as applicable, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
Latest salary sheet giving details, such as, scale of pay, gross pay, PF deduction, TDS for all Faculty
members and non-teaching Staff and Faculty: Student ratio.
Details of the RPGF/ Joint FDR made with AICTE.
Status of existing Students already studying in the Institution.
Status of existing Faculty and Staff in the Institution and liabilities thereon.
Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of the establishment of
Institution set up by Section 8 of Companies Act-2013
1.5.1
1.5.2
1.5.3
1.5.4
1.5.5
1.5.6
1.5.7
1.5.8
1.5.9
1.5.10
Certificate of Registration of companies
Memorandum of Association and Article of Association
Certificate of Incorporation
Availability of the registered office of the company
Particulars of the Directors, Managers or Secretaries
PAN number
TAN number
Companies General Rules and Forms
NOC from Directors or Promoters
Audited Statement for the last 3 years clearly indicating turnover through operations, if applicable
80
--- Page 97 ---
ANNEXURE-2
Documents to be uploaded/submitted by Existing Institutions
2.1 Documents to be uploaded for the issuance of EoA based on Self-Disclosure/after a break in the
preceding Academic Years/ Restoration of Intake
Supporting documents including the Affidavits shall be duly authenticated by the Chairman/ Secretary of
the Trust/ Society/ Company in case of Self-Financing Institutions or by the Authorized person in case of the
Government/ Government aided Institution.
In case of Buildings constructed by Government Departments are older than 50 years as on last date
of application and the departments are unable to submit the original documents, a letter from the
Competent Authority stating that the Building norms of AICTE are full filled, shall be produced to this effect.
i. An Affidavit 2 with digital signature of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company on an
e-stamp paper of Rs. 100/- duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath
Commissioner.
ii. | Copy of pay receipt print made on AICTE Web-Portal if any, in respect of Extension of Approval for the
respective Academic Year.
iii. As per Clause 7.17 of the Approval Process Handbook, valid Occupancy/ Completion Certificate/
Building License/ Form D issued by the Competent Authority.
iv. Valid Structural Stability Certificate from the registered Structural Engineer, if the Building is more than thirty
years from the issue of Completion Certificate that the Building is fit for human habitation.
v.  Avalid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority.
vi. Satellite map, using suitable Web site, showing geographical location of the Land with latitude and
longitude at the entrance of the main Building mentioned on it.
vii. Audited statement of accounts of the Trust/ Society/ Company of the previous year.
2.2 Documents to be uploaded for approval of Introduction of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Introduction of seats for children of
Non Resident Indian(s) duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.3 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of an existing Institution
applied for Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution/
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/ To start new Programme / Level
in the existing Institutions
i All Documents as specified in Annexure-1 of the Approval Process Handbook (only for Change of Site/
Location).
ii. | No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2.
iii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Closure of the Institution for
starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year/ Change of Site/Location/
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa/ Conversion of Diploma
Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions, as
applicable, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
81
--- Page 98 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Note 1: No refund of additional FDR/ Security Deposit allowed in case of Conversion of Co-ed Institution
to Women’s Institution.
2: It is the sole responsibility of the Institution / Promoters to obtain NoC from State Government (if
applicable) before starting of the academic session.
2.4 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of an existing Institution
applied for Merger of Institutions under the Same / Different Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the
same campus
i. All Documents as specified in Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook (except the Institutions
fulfilling Clause 2.10.2 (b) of the Approval Process Handbook).
ii. | No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2.
iii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Merger of Institutions under the
Same / Different Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus, as applicable, duly signed by the
Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
iv. Documents which are applicable legally for merger of Institutions under Different Trust/ Society/
Companyas per the prevailing Government Norms /Rules applicable for such merger.
2.5 Documents to be submitted at the time of Expert Visit Committee for approval of the Introduction of
supernumerary seats for OCI/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries in
existing Institutions
i. Details regarding hostel facilities and hostel administration.
ii. Office of the Internationals Affairs (OIA) to assist in all the matters related to OCI/ Foreign Nationals/
Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.
iii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Introduction of supernumerary
seats for OCI Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries duly signed by the
Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.6 Documents to be submitted at the time of online Scrutiny Committee for approval of Increase in Intake/
Additional Course(s)/ Courses in Indian Language / Introduction of Integrated/ Dual Degree Course /
Introduction of Fellow Program in Management, as applicable
i. An Affidavit 8 on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of Rs. 100/- duly sworn before a First Class
Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner (Not applicable for Extended EoA).
ii. Proof for the existence of Faculty with Ph.D./Fellow qualification as per the number of seats, in case of
Introduction of Fellow Program in Management.
iii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for starting additional Course(s)/
Division(s) in existing Program and allocation of Land/ Building/ Funds for the proposed activities duly
signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.7. Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Progressive Closure/
Complete Closure of the Institution
i. No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2 with clear mention about the
provisions/ alternative arrangements made to take care of Education of existing students studying in the
Institution.
ii. Latest salary sheet giving details, such as, scale of pay, gross pay, PF deduction, TDS for all Faculty
members and non-teaching Staff and Faculty: Student ratio.
82
--- Page 99 ---
Approval Process Handbook
iii. Details of the RPGF/ Joint FDR made with AICTE.
iv. Status of existing Students already studying in the Institution.
Vv. Status of existing Faculty and Staff in the Institution and liabilities thereon.
vi. Affidavit 4 to be submitted by the Applicant on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of Rs.
100/- duly sworn before a First-Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner stating
that the Applicant has no liability with respect to Faculty members, Staff, students etc.
vii. Pending Court cases and serious charges, violation of norms, pending Ragging cases against the
Institution.
viii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Closure of the Institution, duly signed by the
Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.8 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change of Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)
i. An Affidavit 2 on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of Rs.100/- , duly sworn before a First
Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner (not applicable to Change of type of
Institution).
ii. | No Objection Certificate from the affiliating University/ Board in Format 2.
iii. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for the Change of Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University)/ Conversion of Courses into allied Vocational Courses, duly
signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.9 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in the Name of
Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s).
i. No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board with clear mention about provisions/
alternative arrangements made to take care of Education of existing students studying in the Institution in
Format 2 as prescribed on the Web-Portal (Applicable for Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)).
ii. Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of the
Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s)/ duly signed
by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
Note: It is the sole responsibility of the Institution / Promoters to obtain NoC from State Government (if
applicable) before starting of the academic session.
2.10 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in the Name of the
Institution
i. No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2 or A receipt with the Official
Seal from the authorized signatory of the affiliating University/ Board as proof of submission of these
documents
ii. — Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of the
Institution/ duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.11. Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in the Name
of the affiliating University/Board
83
--- Page 100 ---
Approval Process Handbook
No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in Format 2 or A receipt with the Official
Seal from the authorized signatory of the affiliating University/ Board as proof of submission of these
documents
Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of the
affiliating University/ Board duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.12 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in the Bank Details
A notarized Affidavit 9 of the Chairperson/Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company stating the
reasons for the Change in the Bank Details.
Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Change in the Bank Details duly
signed by the Chairperson/ Secretary in Format 3.
In case of merger of banks, NOC/Certificate from the bank to the effect that two or more banks are
merged subject to Government notification.
2.13 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in the
Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/ Company (subject to the existing Law )
vi.
vii.
viii.
Approval from Charity Commissioner / Registrar of Societies / Registrar of Companies for Change in
the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company or merger of Trusts/Societies/Companies.
A notarized Affidavit 10 of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company stating that there is
no commercial or business angle for such change.
A registration document of the Trust/ Society/ Company indicating its members, objectives and
Memorandum of Association and Rules, duly attested/ certified by the concerned Authority.
Details of the recommended BoG of the Institution constituted as per Annexure-17 of the APH.
In case of a Company established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013, the MoA and Rules
must contain a provision that the objective of the Company is not profit making and any surplus
earning shall be used exclusively for the purpose of development of Technical Institution.
Land Documents/ Lease Deeds showing ownership in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/Company.
In case of merger of Trust/ Society/ Company, the transferor of Trust/ Society/ Company should
transfer its Land, assets and Infrastructure by a registered transfer/conveyance deed in the Name of the
transferee Trust/ Society/Company.
Proof of working capital (funds) as stated in Clause1.5.3 of Chapter | of the Approval Process
Handbook, in the form of either Fixed Deposits in the Bank or latest Bank Statement of Accounts
maintained in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company in a Nationalized Bank or Scheduled
Commercial Bank recognized by Reserve Bank of India, along with a Certificate issued by the Branch
Manager of the Bank.
Approval from the Charity Commissioner/ Registrar of Societies/ Registrar of Companies regarding any
change in the Name(s) of the Trustee(s)/Member(s).
Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/
Company, mentioning the reasons for such Change in the Name duly signed by the Chairman/
Secretary in Format 3.
84
--- Page 101 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.14 Documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for Approval of Collaboration and
Twinning Programme(s)
i. The Foreign University/ Institution shall furnish an authorized signatory letter declaring therein that the
Diploma/Degree/ Post Diploma Certificate awarded to the students in India shall be recognized in the
Parent Country and shall be treated equivalent to the corresponding Diploma/ Degree/ Post Diploma
Certificate awarded by the University/ Institution at Parent Country.
ii. Letter of the Trustee on the Fee to be charged and the Intake in each Course to be offered by a
Foreign University/ Institution or the Technical Institution approved by the Council having
Collaboration with Foreign University/ Institution, leading to a Diploma/ Degree/ Post Diploma
Certificate.
iii. A letter of the Trustee and the Foreign University/ Institution declaring the detailed guidelines for
admission, entry Level qualifications, Fee of all kinds, the examination and evaluation and that there shall
not be major deviations with the prescribed procedures in their Parent Country, vis-a-vis India.
iv. A Letter of the Trustee wherein details of the Semesters that are conducted in India and Foreign
Country as per Clause 3.2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
v. Bipartite agreement/ MoU between the Foreign University/ Institution and the Indian Partner Institution
for this purpose.
vi. Bipartite agreement/ MoU between the Indian Institution and the concerned affiliating University/ Board
for this purpose.
vii. Affidavit 11 clearly mentioning among other provisions that the students failing to get Visa shall be
accommodated in a similar Programme and that the University/Board shall register them for the
purpose.
viii. Attested Proof from Foreign University/ Institution that a similar Degree/ Diploma is offered in the Parent
Country.
ix. A letter from the participating Foreign University that the Degree would be awarded by the Foreign
University/ Institution only in its Parent Country.
x. Valid Certificate of NBA / NIRF ranking within Top 200 by Universities /Institutes in respect of the Course(s)
to be offered under Collaboration and Twinning Programme.
xi. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Introduction of Collaboration and Twinning
Programme in the Institution duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in Format 3.
2.15 Documents/Information to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for Approval
of MBA/PGDM (IEV) course
Documents/Information to be submitted for MBA/PGDM (IEV) course as per the format are available in
AICTE Website at www.aicte-india.org.
2.16 Documents/Information to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for Approval
of Off-Campus.
Documents/Information to be submitted for Off-Campus are as per Annexure-1.
85
--- Page 102 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-3
Norms for Land and Built-up Area Requirements of the
Technical Institutions
3.1. Land Requirements for the Technical Institutions
For establishing an Institution offering Diploma/UG/PG Level courses in technical Programmes, the built-up area
requirement will be calculated based on the approved intake and duration of the course per programme. The land
required for the same will be based on prevailing FSI/FAR norms applicable for that location as declared by the
respective competent authority to house the required built-up area as per norms. The same shall be applicable for the
Institutions to be established/ already established in Mega/Metro/Urban/Rural areas.
For the Land area requirements, the following conditions need to be adhered:
a. Institute shall have sufficient built up area to cover all the requirements of ALL the programs/ levels
conducted as per the provisions of Approval Process Handbook.
b. — The Built-up area requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook (which is in- force) are
adhered to.
c. The Built-up area, achieved has to be approved by the concerned Development Authority as per the
latest Building Bye-Laws (Development Controls) in that City/Town. Copy of the approved Plan along
with the Completion Certificate/ Occupancy certificate issued by the concerned State Government
authority needs to be provided. In case of partial/ provisional Occupancy Certificate issued by the
State Government authority, the same shall be considered only for 2 consecutive Academic Years.
d. Fire and life Safety Certificate from Fire Department of the concerned State Government authority is
to be taken before submitting the application at AICTE.
e. Additional Course(s)/Programme(s), in future can be allowed subject to the availability of Built-up
areas as per FSI (FAR). However, if the additional construction is to be undertaken in the existing
Building, then Structural Stability Certificate and Certificate of Safe Foundation to be provided by a
Structural Engineer having a Master's Degree with specialization in Structural Engineering.
f. The total Built-up area is to be calculated for the entire duration of the Course with mandatory prior
sanctions and approvals from Competent Authority for the entire proposal.
g. | The Land area required shall be in a maximum of THREE plots. The Academic, Instructional, Adminis
trative and Amenities area shall be in one plot. The distance between the plots shall not exceed 2 km.
The remaining Land shall only be utilized for sporting Infrastructure/ Hostel/ Staff accommodation
and related educational activities of the Institution. In such cases, adequate commutation facility
between the plots shall be provided for the students and staff members.
h. — Considering the hilly nature of Land in North Eastern States and the hilly regions of States such as
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh’s UT or any area in any State
declared as hilly by the concerned Government, Land shall be made available in 3 pieces which are
not away from each other by more than 2 km. In such cases, adequate commutation facility between
the plots shall be provided for the students and staff members.
i. The institute shall provide ample space for play-ground (owned or hired) facilities for indoor and
outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or through arrangements with other adjacent
Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.
86
--- Page 103 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE:
3.2
Starting other educational Course(s)/ Institutions (Technical/Non-Technical) in the surplus Land/
Built-up area arising out of the prevailing/ reduced norms of Land requirement is permissible.
Further such surplus Land shall be used as per the Land Use Certificate given to the Trust/ Society/
Company by the concerned authority, subject to such Course(s)/ Institution sharing their own
facilities to conduct such Programmes without sharing the essential facilities, such as Class Room,
Laboratory etc. with the already approved Technical Institution. However, Common Amenities such
as Administrative infrastructure, Canteen, Auditorium, Playground, Parking, etc. may be shared,
provided it caters to all the students of all the Programmes.
For Change of Site/ Location or to start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions, mortgage
of land is acceptable.
There is no separate Land required for existing Non-Technical Institutions offering Under Graduate/
Post Graduate Programme/Courses in Computer Application/Management.
Minimum Built-up Area Requirements
The Institution area is divided into, Instructional area (INA, carpet area in m?), Administrative area
(ADA, carpet area in m?), Amenities area (AMA, carpet area in m?).
Access and Circulation Area (ACA) is around 25% of Built-up Area.
Total Built-up area in m2 is equal to (INA+ADA+AMA) + (ACA).
In case of allied branches in Engineering and Technology, a maximum of 50% of Laboratories may
be shared.
For Post Graduate Programmes, Administrative area of Under Graduate Programmes may be shared.
Institutions shall have the Barrier free environment and Sports facilities as specified in the
Chapter VII of
3.2.1 Instructional Area
Total Number of Divisions per
year x Total Duration of course
in years x 0.5
66(For a division of 60)
Class Rooms 33(For a division of 30)
Tutorial Rooms+ 25% of total Class Room 33
4 (which includes 2 Laboratories
Laboratory for First Year for Basic sciences) : Up to an 66
intake of 600
2 per Course per Year up to an
Laboratory other than First Year intaDOh TBO per Course 66
Laboratory for Post Graduate lper Course 66
Courses 1 Research Laboratory 66
1 (Up to an intake of 600)
Workshep +1 for an intake of 601-1200 #79
Additional Laboratory/Workshop 200 (For UG)
for “X" Category Courses
1
150(For Diploma)
CAD Centre/Drawing Hall#$
1(Up to an intake of 600)
+1 for an intake of 601-1200
132
87
--- Page 104 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1(Up to an intake of 600)
‘Semnfrtiten Comite +1 for an intake of 601-1200 150
Seminar Hall ] 132
Library++ ] 400
Language Laboratory+ ] 33
>» For Courses having more than 3 Divisions, additional Laboratories equivalent to the required number on
pro rata basis for the said Courses shall be created.
>» “X" Category Courses such as Mechanical, Production, Civil, Electrical, Chemical, Textile, Marine,
Aeronautical and Allied/Relevant Courses shall require an Additional Laboratory/ Workshop.
>» Infrastructure Requirement shall be calculated on prorata basis for institutions having “Approved Intake”
greater than 1200.
Total Number of Divisions per 60 (For UG)
Class Rooms year x Total Duration of course c
. 30 (For PG)
in years x 0.5
Resource Centre 80
Computer Laboratory (First Year) 60
Studio (other than First Year) 1 per Course per Year 120
Post Graduate Studio 2 60
Model making and Carpentry 120
Workshop
Art Court 100
Multi-Purpose Hall 150
Research Laboratory* 60
Computer Centre 75
. 1 per Under Graduate Institution 132
Seminar Hall ; a 7
1 per Diploma Institution 32
Library++ 150
Language Laboratory# 30
Class Rooms 1 Room per Division per Year 66 (For Diploma & UG)
33 (For PG)
Tutorial Rooms+ 25% of total Class Room BS
Workshop/Studio 1 per Course per Year 66
Common Workshop/Studio 90
WALA 1 per specialization 66
Studio/Display Room ] 132
Craft Centre 66
Computer Centre 75
Theatre/Seminar Hall ] 100
Library++ 150
Language Laboratory+ ] 33
--- Page 105 ---
Approval Process Handbook
100 (For Diploma & UG)
Class Rooms/Studio 1 per Division per Year 66 (For PG)
Tutorial Rooms** 1 per Year 33
Laboratory/Workshop 1 per Division per Year 66
Photography Laboratory 1 66
Computer Laboratory ] 75
Seminar Hall 1 100
Library++ ] 150
Language/Audio Visual
Laboratory
Total Number of Divisions per .
Class Rooms year x Total Duration of course 66 (For Diploma & UG)
in years x 0.5 S9 Rar ey
Tutorial Rooms** 25% of total Class Room 33
Laboratory (Guest Room/House
Keeping/ Front Office/ Kitchen)for 3 66
First Year
Laboratory (Guest Room/ House
Keeping/ Front Office/ Kitchen) 2 per Course per Year 66
other than First Year
Laboratory/ Guest Room for Post
Graduate Programme 1 per Specialization 66
Kitchen with Dining Hall 1 132
Restaurant 2 66
Computer Centre 1 =
Seminar Hall 1 77
Library++ 1 7G
Language Laboratory 1
Class Rooms 1 per Division per Year
Tutorial Rooms 25% of total Class Room 33
Computer Laboratory* ] 66
Computer Centre 1 150
Seminar Hall ] 132
Library++ ] 100
Language Laboratory ]
Class Rooms 1 per Division per Year
Tutorial Rooms 25% of total Class Room 33
Computer Centre ] 150
Language Laboratory (Applicable 1 33
only for UG)
Seminar Hall 1 132
Library++ ] 100
Language Laboratory ] 33
89
--- Page 106 ---
Note:
3.3
3.4
Approval Process Handbook
1. It is desirable that an institution shall possess carpet area of 1.1 Sq. m per student to be utilized for
teaching and learning purpose (class rooms and tutorial rooms). (Ref: NBCC)
2. Additional Laboratories to be created (if required) as per Curriculum of the concerned affiliating
University.
3. + Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software.
Additional Number of Computers shall be increased on prorata basis for approved intake greater
than 300 i.e. 0-300:20 Computers, 301-600:40 Computers, 601-900:60 Computers etc.
4. ++ Additional Library area of 50 m? per 60 Students beyond 420 “Approved Intake”.
5. * Applicable only for Post Graduate Courses
6. ** Not Applicable for Post Graduate Courses.
7. $ Not applicable for DMLT.
8. Diploma Laboratories, if shared with the Under Graduate Degree Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of the Under Graduate Curriculum.
9. Under Graduate Laboratories, if shared with Post Graduate Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of Post Graduate Curriculum.
0. The Institution shall have minimum one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board,
Internet Connection, etc.
1. Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart Board, PA
system etc.
2. Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation/ Fab Laboratory/ Idea Implementation
Centre/ Tinkering Laboratory/ Innovation Centre.
Oy There are many nomenclatures common to Engineering Diploma and Applied Arts/ Crafts Diploma.
Hence in all such multidisciplinary type of programs, actual requirements shall be evaluated by
respective Boards.
Administrative Area (Carpet Area) in m2
An institution should possess a total administrative area of minimum 750 sq. m. for an approved intake up
to 300. The particulars under administrative area includes Principal/Director Room, Board room (30 seater),
Office all inclusive, Cabin for head of department and department office, Faculty cabins, Meeting room (15
seater), Central store, Maintenance room, Security cabin, Housekeeping room, Pantry for staff, Placement
office etc. It is desirable that for an Institution having more than one program, the area for office all-
inclusive shall be doubled.
Amenities Area (Carpet Area) in m?
An institution should possess a total amenities area of minimum 500 sq. m. for an approved intake up
to 300. The particulars under amenities area includes Toilets (adequate number for ladies and gents),
boys common room, girls common room, cafeteria, stationary store and reprography, first aid cum sick
room. In addition to the same, it is also desired that Institutions shall possess additional amenities area
such as guest house, sports club, auditorium, hostels (boys and girls), faculty and staff quarter’s etc.
90
--- Page 107 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE: 1. Institutions shall satisfy the total of Amenities & Administrative area as mentioned above.
3.5
However, the individual areas for each particular mentioned above shall be decided by
the Institution as per the standard norms followed (refer NBCC).
2. Adequate Number of Toilets shall be provided for Ladies and Gents based on the total students and
staff members available in the campus and the same shall be maintained hygienically.
3. Access and Circulation area (ACA) of 25% of sum of Instructional, Administrative and Amenities
area is desired for covering common walkways, staircases and entrance lobby.
Land Requirement
Land Requirement in Mega & Metro, Urban and Rural areas shall be decided based on FSI / FAR norms
applicable to the respective areas under the concerned Municipal Corporation or the Local Authority that
approves the Building Plans or the State Government / UT. However, the Institutions may refer the previous
Approval Process Hand Book for more details.
91
--- Page 108 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-4
Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software, Internet
and Laboratory Equipment of the Technical Institutions
4.1 Computers, Software and Internet
Diploma 1:10
Engineering and Technology Under Graduate 1:10
Post Graduate 1:4
. Under Graduate 1:6
Planning 7
Post Graduate 4
Diploma 1:6
Applied Arts and Crafts Under Graduate 1:6
Post Graduate 1:4
. Under Graduate 1:6
Design 7
Post Graduate 4
Hotel Management and Catering | Diploma 1:6
Technology Under Graduate 1:6
oo. Under Graduate 1:10
Computer Application 7
Post Graduate 4
Under Graduate 1:10
Management 7
Post Graduate :6
Note:
1. Institution shall possess adequate number of Systems Software and Application software including
plagiarism checking software with a valid license.
2. All PC’s/ Laptops shall be connected through LAN/Wi-Fi.
Oo The institutions shall possess printers up to a minimum 5% of the total number of PCs/Laptops.
4. At least one printer to be Al Size Color Printer/ Plotter s required for the programme- Planning.
OF The Institution shall possess an Internet bandwidth based on the approved intake. For Intake up to
300: 100Mbps, 301-600: 300Mbps, 601-900: 500Mbps, > 900: 1Gbpa.
6. Utilization of Open Source Software shall be encouraged.
7. Secured Wi-Fi facility with reliable hardware is highly recommended.
8. Library, Administrative Offices and Faculty members shall be provided with exclusive computing
facilities along with LAN and Internet. This shall be considered as over and above the requirement
meant for PCs to students’ ratio.
9. PC shall also include Laptop in the inventory of the Institution.
10. Every Department shall have separate Computer Laboratory with at least 20 Computers.
by
--- Page 109 ---
Approval Process Handbook
11. Effective utilization of ICT/ Research/ Other academic related facilities extended by agencies/
organizations through MoU with AICTE is highly recommended (https://www.aicte-india.org/
education/collaborations).
4.2 Laboratory Equipment and Experiments
The Laboratories shall have appropriate and adequate number of equipment as prescribed by the
affiliating University/ Board’s Curriculum for the effective conduct of laboratories.
4.3. Books and Library Facilities
Diploma
Engineering and . DO 5xNo.of Titles x B
Technology/ Applied (First Year)
Arts and Crafts/ B SO# 15 % (Max. 150)
Hotel Management 5xNo.of Tit B
and Catering 50* Per Course from | 2 0°Or eS *
Technology 2nd Year Onwards
Under Graduate
. . 100#(First Year) 5xNo.of Titles x B
Engineering and B 50% C fi
Technol per Course from z
echnology 2nd Year to 4th Year 5xNo.of Titles x B
Management &
Computer B 50# Per Year 5xNo.of Titles x B
Application
100# .
olan ; First Year 5xNo.of Titles x B
anning
50* Per Year from . 9
2nd Year to 4th Year 5xNo.of Titles x B 15 % (Max. 150)
100# .
Applied Arts and First Year 5xNo.of Titles x B
Crafts/ Design 8 50*Per year from .
2nd Year to 4th Year Rabie. oh Milles x B
100#
Hotel Management First Year 5xNo.of Titles x B
and Catering B ;
Technology por Renvearirom 5xNo.of Titles x B
2nd Year to 4th Year
Post Graduate
Engineering and
Technology/
Planning/ Applied
Arts and Crafts/
= B 50 Per Course AxNo.of Titles x B
Design/Hotel
Management and 25 % (Max. 100)
Catering
Technology
MCA/ PGDM/ MBA B 100# 5xNo.of Titles x B
50* 5xNo.of Titles x B
B - Number of Divisions at First year
# Book Titles and Volumes required at the time of starting a new Technical Institution equally distributed per subject.
* Annual Increment equally distributed per subject.
93
--- Page 110 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE:
1 Total number of Titles and Volumes shall be increased in continuation till 10 years from the starting of the
course(s), which shall be the minimum stock of Books. After 10 years as per the Affiliating Body Curriculum
and Syllabus, the Older Edition Books shall be replaced with latest edition by 5% of the total minimum Books
required for that Programme.
2 Books shall also include subjects of Sciences, Humanities, Management and Social Sciences as per the
requirements of the Curriculum and Syllabus.
3. The reading room shall possess Multimedia PC’s for Digital Library/Internet surfing to cater up to 10% of total
students ( Maximum limited to 30 PC’s)
4 It is desired that the Library shall be kept functional for the students and faculty members for a
minimum of 16 hrs. per day on working days and 12 hrs. on non-working days
5 Reprographic center including scanning facility in the Library is essential.
6 Facilities to access the Online Courses is essential.
7 Library automation software including Bar coding is desirable.
8 Up to 66% of the total number of Titles and Volumes may be in the form of e-books with intranet access
mandatory in case of Post Graduate Level Programme(s) and shall be desirable in case of UG/ Diploma
Programme(s). Member in NDL/ Indian National Digital Library in Engineering Sciences and Technology
INDEST) or any other National Consortium is permissible for e-books.
9 The Institution shall be a member of National Digital Library(NDL) and shall encourage faculty
members and students to secure membership. Aggregators may also be used.
4.4 Labratory Equipment and Experiments
Diploma
Engineering and
Technology Planning/ Applied
Arts and Crafts/ Design/ Hotel
Management and
Catering Technology
Adequate Number of Journals /Periodicals / Magazines Providing
Exposure to New Products/ Ideas/Concepts etc.
Under Graduate & Post Graduate
Engineering and
Technology/Planning/Applied
Arts and Crafts/ Design Hotel
Management and 6x N
Catering ( For each Level)
Technology/
Management/Computer
Applications
NOTE:
=
All the Journals in the Library are to be “subscribed” and are to be indexed
2. Subscription may NOT necessarily mean Individual Procurements, but can be part of University /
State / Group of Institutes in a “Consortium”.
oe The e-Shodh Sindhu is providing support in negotiating the prices of e-resources
to AICTE approved Technical Institutions. The same shall be explored by the Institutions.
4, Journals shall also include subjects of Science, Humanities, Management and Social Science
94
--- Page 111 ---
ANNEXURE-8
Norms for Faculty Requirements and Cadre Ratio of the
Technical Institutions
5.1 Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate Programme
Engineering and
Technology/
Applied Arts
and Crafts . 1 per
Design/ Hotel Tes | Department (8/25) —1 SCS
Management
and Catering
Technology
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake” for all years
5.2 Under Graduate Degree Programme
Engineering and 1 g S g S
:20 1 1
Technology 20eR *' | 20xr *? |—goxR ** | 20
§
Planning 1:16 ] a xl TR x2 TéxR x6 77
Applied Arts and = S 1 Ss Ss 6 Ss
Crafts NS | TSR” | 15k? | TSR 15
. + 3) S) Ss Ss
D I ] 1 2
ean : Tek *! | 75x 7 | Tor %O 15
Hotel
Management
and 1:20 ] Ss 1 Ss 2 Ss S
Catering 20x *! | 20xk~? | Dox *° 20
Technology
Computer 1 S S g g
ok w/5) 1
Applications 25xR xl 25xR x2 25xR x6 25
ST =) Ss Ss
1 2 6
Management 1:25 1 25xR *~ | 25xR * 25xR * 25
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake” for all years, R = (1+2+6)=9
95
--- Page 112 ---
Post Graduate Degree Programme
Approval Process Handbook
Engineeri
Technology* 15xR 15xR 15xR S)
. § S S S
PI ral -
Suit ° TOxR TOxR TOxR 10
Applied Arts 45 - Ss § SI S)
and Crafts : 15xR 15xR 15xR 15
Design 215 - Ss S S S_
15xR 15xR 15xR 5
Hotel
Management 12 - S S S S_
and Catering T2xR T2xR T2xR 2
Technology*
Computer 5 3 $
Application :20 1 S xl x2 x6
(MCA)# 20xR 20xR 20xR 20
S S § §
Management , xl x2 x6
a7 1
MBA/ PGDM* 0 20xR 20xR 20xR 20
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake” for all years In case of non-availability of
qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.
*R = (14141); *R = (14246)
In case of the average admission during last 3 years is less than or equal to 50% of the average sanction
intake, the requirement of faculty members shall be reduced by 25% on account of the number of batches
of students going to laboratory/ project work/ seminars/workshops etc. The same is illustrated below.
175
300 Boor ¥s 4 60 60
130 45
380 (Below 50 %) 4 oe (60 X 0.75)
Incase of non-availability of qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.
In Integrated Planning Course, Faculty requirement is 1:16 for the first three years and 1:10 for the next
two years.
Cadre Ratio shall be1:2:6 (Not applicable to Diploma Level).
--- Page 113 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-6
Norms for PGDM/PGCM Courses
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
The duration of the Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) Course shall be 2 years.
Post Graduate Certificate in Management (PGCM) Course shall be of lyear duration.
PGDM Programme shall be of duration of 18 Months for working professionals having a minimum of 3 years
relevant managerial/supervisory experience.
The Academic calendar for admission of students shall be followed as prescribed by AICTE. The admission
shall be started from 1st March (subject to the grant of EoA for the current Academic Year by the Council) and
end by 30th June every year.
Admission to PGDM Courses shall be made only from the candidates qualified from any one of the six All
India tests, i.e.; CAT, XAT, CMAT, ATMA, MAT, GMAT or the common entrance examinations (if any) conducted
by the respective State Governments / Central Government (CUET) for all Institutions other than
Minority Institutions.
The candidates shall be short listed on the basis of the overall rank computed taking into account of the
following components and their weights:
i. Score in the Common Admission test - 35 to 60%
ii. Score for academic performance in X Std., XII Std., Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Degree
- 5 to 25%
iii. Group discussion/ interview - 20 to 45%
iv. Weight age for participation in Sports, Extra-Curricular activities, Academic diversity and Gender
diversity - 5 to 20%
PGDM Institutions shall publish the information regarding the name of the Common Admission test, from
which the candidates are selected for admission, the percentage of scores of the above components on its
website and admission Brochure well before the admission process initiated and inform the Applicants through
specific communications.
The Institution shall clearly display and inform AICTE (through URL under attachment tab in web portal) and
clearly display on the Institution Web site the eligibility criteria, selection procedure and the merit list of the
candidates who have applied for the Programme. The selection of the students shall be strictly on the basis of
merit only.
Institutions shall upload PGCM/ PGDM students’ enrolment data in the prescribed format on AICTE
Web-Portal within one month from the last date as prescribed by AICTE for admission every year. If it is not
uploaded, the Council shall not permit such institutions to apply for approval for the next Academic Year.
The Institutions shall mandatorily mention the enrolment number allotted to each student by AICTE in their
Diploma Certificate and mark sheets as per the format available in AICTE Portal.
Institutions may devise their own Curriculum for PGCM/ PGDM Courses, however it shall be in conformity with
the Model Curriculum developed by AICTE and incorporate significant part of academic components in their
Curriculum. To introduce any new Course, the nomenclature and Syllabus of the same shall be submitted to
the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE for approval of the concerned Board.
97
--- Page 114 ---
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
GES)
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
6.12
Approval Process Handbook
The duration of the Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) Course shall be 2 years.
Post Graduate Certificate in Management (PGCM) Course shall be of lyear duration.
PGDM Programme shall be of duration of 18 Months for working professionals having a minimum of 3 years
relevant managerial/supervisory experience.
The Academic calendar for admission of students shall be followed as prescribed by AICTE. The admission
shall be started from 1st March (subject to the grant of EoA for the current Academic Year by the Council) and
end by 30th June every year.
Admission to PGDM Courses shall be made only from the candidates qualified from any one of the six All
India tests, ie.; CAT, XAT, CMAT, ATMA, MAT, GMAT or the common entrance examinations (if any) conducted
by the respective State Governments / Central Government (CUET) for all Institutions other than
Minority Institutions.
The candidates shall be short listed on the basis of the overall rank computed taking into account of the
following components and their weights:
i. Score in the Common Admission test - 35 to 60%
ii. Score for academic performance in X Std., XII Std., Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Degree
- 5 to 25%
iii. Group discussion/ interview - 20 to 45%
iv. Weight age for participation in Sports, Extra-Curricular activities, Academic diversity and Gender
diversity - 5 to 20%
PGDM Institutions shall publish the information regarding the name of the Common Admission test, from
which the candidates are selected for admission, the percentage of scores of the above components on its
website and admission Brochure well before the admission process initiated and inform the Applicants through
specific communications.
The Institution shall clearly display and inform AICTE (through URL under attachment tab in web portal) and
clearly display on the Institution Web site the eligibility criteria, selection procedure and the merit list of the
candidates who have applied for the Programme. The selection of the students shall be strictly on the basis of
merit only.
Institutions shall upload PGCM/ PGDM students’ enrolment data in the prescribed format on AICTE
Web-Portal within one month from the last date as prescribed by AICTE for admission every year. If it is not
uploaded, the Council shall not permit such institutions to apply for approval for the next Academic Year.
The Institutions shall mandatorily mention the enrolment number allotted to each student by AICTE in their
Diploma Certificate and mark sheets as per the format available in AICTE Portal.
Institutions may devise their own Curriculum for PGCM/ PGDM Courses, however it shall be in conformity with
the Model Curriculum developed by AICTE and incorporate significant part of academic components in their
Curriculum. To introduce any new Course, the nomenclature and Syllabus of the same shall be submitted to
the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE for approval of the concerned Board.
Board of Governors (BoG)/Board of Management (BoM) is to be constituted as per Annexure-17 of the
Approval Process Handbook for Standalone PGDM Institutions. The minutes of the meetings of the Board of
Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) shall be uploaded periodically in the website of the
Institutions.
PGDM Institutions shall refund the Fee collected, after deducting an amount of Rs. 1000/-(One Thousand
only) as processing Fee and return the Certificates to the students withdrawing the admission before the last
date of admission, irrespective of the reasons for withdrawal of admission. The last date for withdrawal of
98
--- Page 115 ---
Approval Process Handbook
6.21
admission for the purpose of refund of Fee shall be 30th June of every year.
PGDM Institutions shall publish the Fee being charged in its web site and admission Brochure well before the
admission process is initiated and inform the Applicants through specific communications.
PGDM Institutions shall follow norms and standards and conditions prescribed by the Council from time to
time.
PGDM Institutions should upload both the Transcripts and Certificates of all the students passed out on
Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) and provide ABC registration details on AICTE portal.
The rules with respect to matters relating to examinations and arbitration shall be decided by the All India
Board of Management, AICTE.
OMBUDSPERSON shall be appointed as per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance
of Students) Regulation, 2019 vide F No. 1-101/PGRC/AICTE/ Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019.
The academic session shall normally be from 1st July of the Current Calendar Year to 30th June of the next
Calendar Year.
The Standalone Institutions (PGDM) are falling under THREE categories, as Category I, Il and Ill based on the
All India Council for Technical Education (Categorisation of Standalone Institutions (Sls) for Grant of Graded
Autonomy) Regulations, 2019.
Category I/ Il Institutions shall have to update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply the
norms and standards as specified by AICTE from time to time. An Affidavit 2 to this effect shall be submitted
annually to AICTE. Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal within one month from the
last date for admission every year. Also, Institutions should upload both the Transcripts and Certificates of all
the students passed out on Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) and provide ABC registration details on
AICTE portal.
Standalone institutions offering PGDM/PGCM courses under the same Trust/Society but located at different
cities/states shall be permitted for consolidation. The students could be admitted through a centralised
admission process and also the semester / yearly examinations could be conducted centrally. However, all the
institutions which are subject for consolidations shall mandatorily adher to the norms and conditions w.rt
infrastructure, land and faculty individually. Faculty sharing shall be permitted among the consolidated
campuses for delivery of expert lectures. However, each campus shall maintain its faculty student ratio as
prescribed by the council. The main campus of such institutions which are intending for consolidation shall fall
under the Category 1 or 2 of the graded autonomy granted by AICTE. If not, the institution shall submit an
undertaking that they shall secure Graded autonomy within 2 years from the date of consolidation.
If any complaints are received regarding violation of prescribed norms, AICTE shall inspect the Institution and
punitive action as specified in Chapter VII of the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated.
The existing standalone PGDM institutions may run Fellow Program in Management (FPM) based on their
eligibility as specified in Clause 2.12 of Chapter II.
The Conduct and Admission procedure for such approved FPM program shall be in line with the norms as
specified in Annexure-15.
99
--- Page 116 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-7
Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical
Institution Issue of LoA/ LoR
ie ble
MBE] e ln
YI "|
Anan hb
--- Page 117 ---
ANNEXURE-8
Norms for Duration, Entry Level Qualifications and Statutory
Reservations for the Technical Programmes
To make the students employable after every exit, the skill component with progressive enhancement in skills in
respective disciplines may be introduced in the curriculum right from the 1st year of the program by the concerned
regulatory body/ University/ Technical Board, as the case may be.
While allowing exit at the end of first year, institutes may prescribe mandatory skill course module on Technical
Communication and Computer Proficiency (Data Entry etc.), Civil / Mechanical Draftsmanship, Electrical maintenance etc.
] 10th Std. 10th Standard 3.0
A candidate exits with
10+1 year of
2 L " ae ete 10th Completed Diplomas 3.5
One telne Certificate of Vocation (C.
Voc.)
3a 12th Std. Passed 11th std. 12th Standard 4.0
A candidate completing 10+1 year A candidate exits with
2nd yr. of of Diploma (C. Voc.) or equivalent . .
3b . : . . 10+2 years with Diploma 4.0
Diploma vocational training with level 3.5 or of Vocation
passed 12th std.
A candidate completing 10+2 years
Third yr. of with Diploma of Vocation or .
fo Diploma equivalent vocational training with Diploma Engg. a5
level 4
A candidate completing 10+2 years
Ab Ist yr. of UG with Diploma of Vocation or passed UG Certificate 45
Degree 12th std. or equivalent vocational
training with level 4
A candidate with Diploma in
2nd yr. of UG appropriate branch of Engineering/ ,
g Degree UG Certificate/ Equivalent Vocational Uc-Eplome tetas.) ee
or Technical Program level 4.5
3rd yr. of UG A candidate with 10+3+1/12+2/ (Engg.)/ UG
6 UG Diploma (Engg.) in appropriate B.Voc./ B.Sc
Degree ae Degree
domain with level 5
. A candidate with 3 yrs. Bachelor
7 inal ae PWS are cree it Wacation AB:Se(Enge UG B.E./B. Tech./ UG Device
Degree 4 (Hons.)
Degree with level 5.5
8 Ist yr. of PG A candidate with 4 yrs. Bachelor( level PG Diploma/ M.Voc 65
Degree 6.00)
Final Year of PG 1 year of PG Degree/ PG Diploma/ M Tech/ PG Degree
9 M.Voc(Level 6.5) in appropriate 7.0
Degree d ! (Engg.)/ PG Degree
lomain
10 Ph.D/ Fellow B.Tech. with 75% Marks or equivalent 8.0
Program CGPA/ PG :
National Credit Framework(NCrF) for UG & PG Courses in Engineering Students who exit after 2nd year of B.Tech.
course must undergo skill modules on IT/Hardware Networking / METLAB or Branch specific skill module.
101
--- Page 118 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Course structure at 3% year and 4th year of B.Tech. is already Engineering specific, students who exit after 3-years
may be awarded UG Degree/ B. Voc/ B.Sc(Engg.).
For Diploma students who exit after 1s year, Certificate of Vocation (C.Voc.) and who exit after 2"4 year Industrial
Training Certificate(ITC)/ Diploma of Vocation may be awarded.
At each entry level, Institution/ University has to identify the educational gaps/ skill gaps and suitable bridge courses
may be offered.
8.1 Diploma Course:
| aE ee 3 -years Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination 3.0
ll Magee ane 3 Years Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination 3.0
Ill Design 3 years Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination 3.0
Motel Manceenent 3 years Passed 10+2 examination 4.0
IV d Cateri
“Technology. 5 years Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination 3.0
Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics
/ Chemistry/ Computer Science/ Electronics/
Information Technology/ Biology/ Informatics
Practices/
Biotechnology/ TechnicalVocational subject/
Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/
Entrepreneurship as per table 8.4
Or
10th + 2 year ITI shall be
eligible for admission to Second Year Diploma
2 years Course(s) in Any 4.0
branch of Engineering and
Technology.
All Programmes
(Lateral Entry to
Second Year
Diploma)
(The Affiliating Body will offer suitable bridge courses
such as Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing,
etc., for the
students coming from diverse
backgrounds to achieve desired learning outcomes
of the
programme)
Post Diploma
Passed Diploma
examination with at least 50% marks (45%
18 Months or 2 years marks in case of
candidates belonging to reserved category)
in the qualifying examination.
Engineering and
Technology
102
--- Page 119 ---
Approval Process Handbook
8.2 Under Graduate Degree
Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics/
Chemistry/ Computer Science/ Electronics/ Information
Technology/ Biology/ Informatics Practices/
Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject/ Agriculture/
Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/
Entrepreneurship as per table 8.4
Agriculture stream (for Agriculture Engineering)
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of
candidates belonging to reserved category) in the above
4 4 years subjects taken together. 4.0
Technology OR
Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.
, Engineering and
(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such
as Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for
the students coming from diverse backgrounds to
prepare Level playing field and desired learning
outcomes of the
programme)
Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as pe table 8.4
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying 40
Examination. .
OR
Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.
Planning 4 years
Passed 10+2 examination
Mm Applied Arts
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates
and Crafts 4 years belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying 4.0
Examination.
OR
Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.
Passed 10+2 examination
Design Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates
4 years belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying 4.0
Examination.
OR
Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.
Under Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per the
Graduate Affiliating University Admission Policy.
Courses in 3/4
Computer Heus OR
Application
(BCA)
Under
Graduate Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per the
Mes in 3/ Aedes Affiliating University Admission Policy.
ianagement
(BBA/BMS/BBM
etc.)
A pass in diploma in Commercial Practice or equivalent
103
--- Page 120 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Passed 10+2 examination
Hotel Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates
Management belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying
VII and Catering 4 years Examination. 4.0
Technology OR
Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.
Passed Minimum THREE years / TWO years (Lateral
Entry) Diploma examination with at least 45% marks
(40% marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved
category) in ANY branch of Engineering and Technology.
OR
Passed B.Sc. Degree from a recognized University as
defined by UGC, with at least 45% marks (40% marks
in case of candidates belonging to reserved category)
Engineering and passed 10+2 examination with Mathematics as a
and Technolo: subject.
vill (Lateral Entry to yea oo
Second year) OR
Passed B.Voc/3-year D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied
sector.
(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such as
Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the
students coming from diverse backgrounds to achieve
desired learning outcomes of the programme)
Refer Annexure-8
Engineering
and Technology . .
IX (Ucterellentiny ts 2 years UG Diploma in Engg. 5.0
Third year)#
Engineering
and Technology \ Ws
xX (loteraltENtry to 1 year B.Voc. in relevant discipline 55)
Final year)#
All Programmes
Other than VF
Engineering and Lateral Passed Minimum 3-years / 2-years (Lateral Entry)
XI 5 Pral 9g / Entry to Diploma examination in a Programme with at least 45% 45
Senne ey Second marks (40%marks in case of candidates belonging to .
Plann year reserved category) in appropriate Programme.
Design
104
--- Page 121 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE: Admission of B.Tech/B E graduates, in other branches of Engineering as an additional degree through
Lateral Entry will be facilitated by the respective Technical Universities by allowing them to take admission at
appropriate level of B.Tech/B.E. discipline/branch of Engineering. [Refer AICTE circular No. FNo. AICTE/P&AP/
Misc/2020 dated 09.08.2021]
8.3 Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Certificate
Passed Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent.
Engineering
| and 2 years Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case 6.0
Techwnology of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Enai . Passed Bachelor’s Degree or equivalent.
ngineering
II ome 1 year Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case 6.0
Technology f . :
a of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
(Certificate) a a.
the qualifying examination.
Passed Bachelor Degree in Planning/ Architecture/
Civil Engineering
lll Planning 2 years OR 6.0
Passed Master Degree of Geography/ Economics/
Social Sciences or equivalent Degree.
Passed Bachelor Degree in Fine Arts or equivalent
Applied Degree.
\V ‘aise 2 eels Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case He
Crafts f . :
of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Passed Bachelor Degree of minimum 4 years
duration.
Y Design 2 Eas Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case oe
of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Passed Bachelor Degree in Hotel Management
Hotel and Catering Technology/ Hotel Management of
M minimum 4 years duration orequivalent Degree.
anagement
Vi and Caterin 2 years 6.0
Technolo 9 Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case
ay of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Passed any graduation degree (e.g.: B.E. / B.Tech./
B.Sc / B.Com. / B.A./ B. Voc./ BCA etc.,) preferably
with Mathematics at 10+2 level or at Graduation
level
Computer Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case
Application of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
sett) (MCA 1* 2Years the qualifying examination. ii
Year)
(for students having no Mathematics background
compulsory bridge course will be framed by the
respective University/ Institution and additional
bridge courses related to computer subjects as per
the norms of the concerned University).
105
--- Page 122 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Computer
Application
Mic Segoe B Tech/B.E. ( CSE/IT) subject to availability of seats
VII (b) Year 1 year and BCA (4 Years) 6.0
(Lateral
Entry)]
Passed Bachelor Degree of minimum 3 years
Management duration.
(MBA/MMS)
ahh 2 Eas Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case oe
1 Year of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Management
(MBA/MMS)
VIII (b) 24 Year 1 Year BE/B Tech or BBA / BMS (4 Years) 6.0
(Lateral Entry)
Passed Bachelor’s Degree of minimum 3 years
duration.
Management
x (PGCM) U esr Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case Sus
of Candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Passed any Bachelors Degree of minimum 3 years
duration.
2 years* . 5 6 . 5.5
Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case
of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
Management =
x (PGDM) Passed any Bachelors Degree of minimum 3 years
duration and a minimum of 3 years relevant
managerial/ supervisory experience.
18 months 85)
Obtained at least 50% marks (45% marks in case
of candidates belonging to reserved category) in
the qualifying examination.
* With exit option of PGCM after completion of 1st year subject to fulfilling the required credits
106
--- Page 123 ---
Approval Process Handbook
8.4
Diploma/Under Graduate Engineering Entry level qualification 10+2 level
Aeronautical
] : Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
Phy, Chem
Agriculture Maths/Biology/Biotechnology/Agriculture/
2 : a OR :
Engineering Agriculture stream
Agriculture stream
3 Architecture As per Norms of Council of Architecture ( CoA )
. For remaining two courses select any courses
4 Planning Maths out of 14#
5 Biotechnology** Phy, Chem Select any one from Bio/Biotechnology/Maths
6 Coreuaite Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
7 Civil Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Cerin OIE For remaining single course select any courses
8 Science and Phy, Maths 9 sing Y
. . out of 144
Engineering
9 Chemical Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
10 E Bestia Phy, Chem, Maths NA
ngineering
rn Electrical Phy, Maths For remaining single course select any courses
Engineering out of 144
12 Eneray Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
13 Electronics Phy, Maths For remaining single course select any courses
Engineering out of 144
14 Mechanical Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
15 Be ene ote arey Chemie: NA
Engineering
. i For remaining two courses select any courses
16 Food Engineering Chem out of 14#
Leathe For remaining two courses select any courses
uy Technology phere out of 14#
18 bem: Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
Metallurgy
19 , : Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
Military
20 ; : Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
21 Mining Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Engineering
22 Nano Technology | Phy, Chem, Maths NA
23 Bycisar Scenes Phy, Chem, Maths NA
and Technology
24 Fockoaie Nil Select any courses out of 14#
Technology
107
--- Page 124 ---
Approval Process Handbook
25 Pharmaceutical Phy, Chem Select any one from Bio/Biotechnology/Maths
ngineering
Printing For remaining single course select any courses
He Engineering** Any nem out of 14#
Textile Phy, Chem,
ay Engineering Maths NA
28 fashion Nil Select any courses out of 14#
Technology
29 Textile Chemistry Chem For remaining two courses select any courses
out of 14#
** First one or two Semesters may be so designed that students with Biology/Biotechnology background have
adequate courses on Maths and Vice Versa and then the class is at level studying field for the rest of the semesters.
#Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/ Computer Science/Electronics/Information Technology/ Biology/ Informatics
Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject/ Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/
Entrepreneurship.
8.5 Integrated / Dual Degree Courses
Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/
Computer Science/Electronics/Information Technology/ Biology/
Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject/
Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/Entrepreneurship
as per table 8.4
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the above subjects taken together.
Engineering OR
and 5 years Passed min. 3 years Diploma examination with at least 45% marks
Technology (40% marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved category)
subject to vacancies in the First Year, in case the vacancies at lateral
entry are exhausted.
(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such as
Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the students
coming from diverse backgrounds to achieve desired learning
outcomes of the programme).
Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per table 8.4
M" Planding p jyenirs Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging
to reserved category) in the qualifying examination.
Hotel Passed 10+2 examination.
Hl Management years
and Catering Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
Technology belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying examination.
Passed 10+2 examination with Mathematics/ Statistics/ Accountancy
Computer as compulsory subjects.
IV Application 4 years
(MCA) Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the above subjects taken together.
Passed 10+2 examination.
Vv Management A
(MBA) hats Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying examination.
108
--- Page 125 ---
Approval Process Handbook
8.6 Fellow Programme
Fellow Programme in Minimum 3 years but shall | Same as mentioned in 15.1 of
Management not exceed 5 years Annexure -15
8.7 Reservation Policy of the Central Government (Including EWS) / Respective State Government/ UT as
the case shall be applicable to all the above Programmes (8.1 to 8.6)
The concerned State Government/ UT Admission authority shall decide Modalities of Admission
a. The admission for Integrated/Dual Degree Course in Management shall be effected on the basis
of separate merit lists of students passed in various streams at 12 Std.as,
i. Science stream: 20 seats
ii. Commerce stream: 20 seats
iii. Arts Stream: 20 seats
In case of non — availability of students from one stream, remaining seats in that stream shall be allotted
to students from other two streams on an equal basis. In case of non-availability of students from two
streams, remaining seats in those streams shall be allotted to students from third-stream.
b. — In case of Integrated Hotel Management and Catering Technology, selection of the students for this
Course shall be done at the start of the Second year of Bachelor’s Degree. Students selected for this
Course shall take additional Course in Management along with the Third Semester of the Regular Course.
c. For integrating vocational and conventional education, the Skill Assessment Matrix for Vocational
Advancement of Youth (SAMVAY) had been launched by MoE) in November, 2014. The credit
framework (as per the following) is now in operation which allows lateral and vertical mobility
within the vocational educational system and between current education systems. It defines the
rules for credit allotment and follows the National Skills Qualification Framework.
The detailed SAMVAY document is available at: https://www.aicten-diia.org/sites/default/
files/ SAMVAY_1_.pdf
8.8 Open Distance Learning / Online Learning Courses
The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the ODL/OL Courses shall be the same as specified by
UGC on the subject from time-to-time.
Preference shall be given to candidates qualified from any one of the six All India tests, i.e.; CAT, XAT,
CMAT, ATMA, MAT, GMAT or the common entrance examinations (if any) conducted by the respective State
Governments / Central Government for all Institutions for Admission to MBA/PGDM courses offered through
ODL/OL mode.
Preference shall be given to candidates qualified from any of the common Entrance examinations
conducted by the respective State Governments/Central Government organization for Admission to MCA
course offered through ODL/OL mode.
109
--- Page 126 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Duration and Entry Level Qualifications
Diploma
3 OR 4 years
In special cases, 2 years after 10+2 Examination
Passed 10th Std./ SSC examination.
or equivalent.
Post Diploma
18 Months OR 2
Passed Diploma examination
years (as per SI. No. i).
Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per
the affiliating University
Under Graduate admission policy.
Courses in Computer
Ml Application SENSES OR
(BCA)
A pass in diploma in Commercial Practice or
equivalent
ost Graduate Passed Bachelor’s
IV Diploma in 2 years Dear {minimum 3 rs durati
Computer Application egree 0 ¥ years curanon.
Passed BCA/ Bachelor
Degree in Computer Science Engineering or
equivalent Degree.
Vv MCA 2 years chs
Passed B.Sc./ B.Com./ B.A. with Mathematics at
10+2 Level or at Graduation
Level (with additional bridge Courses as per the
norms of the concerned University).
Under Graduate
VI Courses in 3/4 year Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per
Management(BBA/ yer the affiliating University admission policy.
BMS/BBM etc.)
Post Graduate More than 1 year ,
tA : ‘ Passed Bachelor’s
VII Certificate in and not exceeding Dear f minimum 3 Peclutati
Management (PGCM) 2 years cores ‘ esis haba ee
eB rca tae Not less than 21 Passed Bachelor’s
Vill Diploma in ne 7
M Months Degree of minimum 3 years duration.
anagement
Post Graduate Passed any Bachelors .
Bislomerin Degree of minimum 3 years duration and a
IX P 15/ 18 Months minimum of 5 years
Management Bits ortnna ial/
(Executive PGDM) tah las bay.
supervisory experience.
Xx MBA paves Passed Bachelor’s
Degree of minimum 3 years duration.
110
--- Page 127 ---
ANNEXURE-9
MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture
Development (IEV)
About the Course
MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV) is a two years PG level management
programme can be offered by higher educational institutions. This is an action oriented and outcome based
programme will admit students with innovative ideas and problem solving mind set with access to pre-incubation and
incubation support at the institute to convert ideas to business model, traverse a path of entrepreneurship and practice
venture as part of academic curriculum to obtain the master degree.
Conditions, Requirements and Eligibility
The existing and new institutions shall apply for PG level management course MBA/PGDM in Innovation,
Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV), provided they satisfy following conditions along with the eligibility
requirements as mentioned in Clause 2.10
a. Institute with a functional incubation unit and pre-incubation facilities, co-working space, innovation
lab facilities. The incubation unit should be established as Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) preferable a
registered entity and minimum three years of operation.
b. Existence and empanelment of competent, trained personals (in-house and external) at the incubation
unit and institute with teaching and learning resources to train, mentor the student innovators/
entrepreneurs.
c. Existence of funding schemes at the incubation unit and institute to support student innovators and
entrepreneurs for the idea development, prototype development, business model and startup
development.
d. Institute/incubation unit’s competency and capability to manage and support a batch of 30 student
innovators and potential entrepreneurs per year starting from idea generation to venture
Development and startup growth stage.
Procedure
In additions to the procedures mentioned in the Clause 2.10, additional submission and scrutiny process for approving
the MBA/PGDM in IEV course are as follows.
a. The Institution shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the additional documents as per
Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. Scrutiny Committee constituted at AICTE office shall verify the additional documents as per
Annexure-2 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for MBA/PGDM in IEV course.
c. A special scrutiny committee constituted at the AICTE HQ level shall verify Annexure-2 and if required,
AICTE will invite institutions to present their case in front of the committee to demonstrate their
competency and capability to run the MBA/PGDM in IEV course.
111
--- Page 128 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-10
Undertaking to be submitted by the Applicant Institute /
University on Letter head for Student Induction Program,
Examination reforms & Internship Policy
I, <Name>, Director / Principal / Registrar of the Institution / University, State and declare as under:
1.
2.
Date:
That the information given by<Name(s)>in the application made to AICTE is true and complete.
That the Institution / University has adopted AICTE Induction Program for Faculty / Student.
That the Institution / University has trained some of the Faculty members in Examination reforms.
That the Institution / University has implemented AICTE Internship Policy for the benefit of Students.
That the Institution / University has established Institution’s Innovation Council (IIC) for students.
The Institution / University has uploaded all the faculty details and other information prescribed by
AICTE
Signature with Name & Designation
(Seal — Institution / University)
112
--- Page 129 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-II
Approved Nomenclature of Courses
11.1 Diploma in Engineering and Technology
3-D Animation and Graphics
Carpet Technology
Administration Services
CDDM
Civil Engineering (Environmental
Engineering
Advanced Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Cement Technology
Aeronautical Engineering
Ceramic Engineering and
Technology
Civil Engineering (Public Health
Engineering
Agricultural Engineering
Ceramic Technology
Civil Engineering (Rural
Engineering
Agricultural Technology
Ceramics
Agriculture Engineering
Ceramics Engineering
Civil Engineering Environment and
Pollution Control
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Civil Environmental Engineering
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
Avionics)
Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer)
Civil Technology
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
Helicopter and Power Plants)
Chemical Engineering (Oil
Technology)
Cloud Computing and Big Data
Alternate Energy Technologies
Chemical Engineering (Petro
Chemical)
Combat Armament and Weapon
Technology
Animation and Multimedia
Technology
Chemical Engineering
(Petrochemical)
Combat Driving and Maintenance
Technology
Apparel Design and Fabric
Apparel Design and Fabrication
Technology
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and
Polymer)
Combat Radio and
Communication Technology
Apparel Design and Fashion
Technology
Chemical Engineering (Sugar
Technology)
Commercial and Computer
Practice
Commercial Practice
pparel Manufacture and Design
Chemical Engineering
Specialization in Petrochemicals
Commercial Practice (KAN and
ENG)
A
Apparel Technology
A
pplied Electronics and
instrumentation Engineering
Chemical Technology (Rubber and
Plastic Technology)
Communication and Computer
Networking
Applied Videography
Chemical Technology (Rubber/
Plastic)
Computer Aided Costume Design
and Dress Making
Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter)
Chemical Technology Fertilizer
Artificer Training (Electrical)
Chemical Technology
Computer Application and Business
Management
Artificer Training (Mechanical)
Artificer Training (Electronics)
Chemical Technology (Paint
Technology)
Computer Applications
Computer Engineering
Artificial Intelligence (Al) and
Machine Learning
Cinematography
Civil (Construction)
Computer Engineering and
Application
Audiography and Sound
Engineering
Civil (Public Health and
Environment) Engineering
Computer Engineering and loT
Automation and Robotics
Automobile Engineering
Civil and Environmental
Engineering
Computer Hardware and
Maintenance
Automobile Engineering
(Automobile Fitter)
Civil and Rural Engineering
Computer Hardware and
Networking
Civil Engineering
Computer Hardware Engineering
Beauty Culture and Cosmetology
Biomedical Electronics
Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)
Computer Networking
Computer Science
Biomedical Engineering
Civil Engineering (Environment and
Pollution Control)
Computer Science and Engineering
Biotechnology
CAD CAM
Civil Engineering (Environmental
and Pollution Control)
Computer Science and information
Technology
Computer Science and Technology
113
--- Page 130 ---
Approval Process Handbook
3-D Animation and Graphics Ceramics Combat Armament and Weapon
Administration Services Ceramics Engineering Technology
Advanced Electronics and Chemical Engineering Combat Driving and Maintenance
ommunicationlene meeting Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer) Ween EH
Combat Radio and
Aeronautical Engineerin - : : -
F a F 2 Chemical Engineering (Oil Communication Technology
Agricultural Engineering Technology) -
F : : F Commercial and Computer
Agricultural Technology Chemical Engineering (Petro Practice
Chemical)
Agriculture Engineering
Commercial Practice
Chemical Engineering
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 7
(Petrochemical)
Commercial Practice (KAN and
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering = = = ; ENG)
Avionics) Chemical Engineering (Plastic and —
Polymer) Communication and Computer
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering Networking
Chemical Engineering (Sugar ; .
Technology) Computer Aided Costume Design
and Dress Making
Helicopter and Power Plants)
Alternate Energy Technologies
Chemical Engineering
Animation and Multimedia Specialization in Petrochemicals Computer Application and Business
echnology ; Management
; : Chemical Technology (Rubber and —
Apparel Design and Fabric Plastic Technology) Computer Applications
Apparel Design and Fabrication Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Computer Engineering
echnology Plastic) Computer Engineering and
Apparel Design and Fashion Chemical Technology Fertilizer Application
echnology
Chemical Technology Computer Engineering and loT
Computer Hardware and
Maintenance
pparel Manufacture and Design
Chemical Technology (Paint
Technology)
A
Apparel Technology
A
pplied Electronics and Cinematography Computer Hardware and
instrumentation Engineerin = Networkin
y £ Civil (Construction) &
Civil (Public Health and
Environment) Engineering
Applied Videography Computer Hardware Engineering
Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter) Computer Networking
Artificer Training (Electrical) Gil onal Gaxiirenmnantial Computer Science
Artificer Training (Mechanical) Engineering Computer Science and Engineering
Artificer Training (Electronics) Civil and Rural Engineering Computer Science and information
Artificial Intelligence (Al) and = : . Technology
Machine Learning eral Engineering Computer Science and Technology
Audiography and Sound Civil Engineering (Construction
Engineering Technology) Computer Software Technology
Automation and Robotics Civil Engineering (Environment and Computer Technology
Automobile Engineering Pollution Control) Construction Automation
Automobile Engineering Civil Engineering (Environmental Construction Engineering
(Automobile Fitter) and Pollution Control) Construction Technology and
Beauty Culture and Cosmetology _ | : : Management
a - . Civil Engineering (Environmental ;
Biomedical Electronics Engineering) Construction Technology
Biomedical Engineering Civil Engineering (Public Health Control and instrumentation
Biotechnology Engineering) Cosmetology and Health
CAD CAM Civil Engineering (Rural Costumer Design and Dress
C idehhl Engineering) Making
arpet Technolo , : :
E eu Civil Engineering Environment and Cyber Forensics and information
eRRM Pollution Control Security
Cement Technology Civil Environmental Engineering Cyber Physical Systems and
Ceramic Engineering and Security
Civil Technology
Technology ( : Cyber System and Information
Ceramic Technology Cloud Computing and Big Data Security
114
--- Page 131 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Dairy Engineering
Design and Drafting Technology
ectronics and Computer
ngineering
Fashion and Clothing Technology
Digital Electronics
Digital Electronics and
Microprocessor
ectronics and Electrical
ngineering
Fashion and Design
Fashion Designing
Digital Manufacturing Technologies
ectronics and instrumentation
ngineering
Fashion Designing and Garment
Technology
Direction Screen Play Writing and
TV Production
ectronics and Telecommunication
Fashion Technology
ectronics and
ele-Communication Engineering
—m)/m|/mm\mmiymm
Film and Video Editing
Dress Designing and Garment
Manufacturing
ectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Radio and System)
Film Technology and TV Production
Cinematography)
Drilling Engineering
Electrical and Electronics (Power
System)
ectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Technologynician
ectronic Radio)
Film Technology and TV Production
Digital Intermediate) *
Finance Account and Auditing
Fire Technology and Safety
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
ectronics and
elecommunications Engineering
—mi|mmmsimm
Fisheries Technology
Electrical and instrumentation
Engineering
ectronics and Video Engineering
Food Processing and Preservation
Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering
ectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering
mmim
Food Processing Technology
Food Technology
Electrical Engineering
Electronics Communication and
instrumentation Engineering
Footwear Technology
Foundry Technology
Electronics Engineering
Gaming and Animation
Electrical Engineering
(Electronics and Power)
Electronics Engineering
Garment and Fashion Technology
Electrical Engineering (Industrial
Control)
Electronics Engineering (Digital
Electronics)
Garment Fabrication
Electrical Engineering
(Instrumentation and Control)
Electronics Engineering (Industry
integrated)
Garment Manufacturing
Technology
Garment Technology
Electrical Engineering and
Electric Vehicle Technology
Electronics Engineering (Micro
ectronics)
Electrical Engineering industrial
Control
ectronics Engineering
lectronics)
Geographic information System
(G.I.S.) and Global Positioning
System
Geo informatics
Glass and Ceramics Engineering
Electrical Power System
Electrical Power Systems
E
E
(Specialization in Consumer
E
E
lectronics Engineering Modern
Consumer Electronics
Handloom and Textile Technology
Heat Power Engineering
Electronic instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Electronics Engineering with
Microprocessor
Home Science
Electronic Science and Engineering
Electronics instrument and Control
Hotel Management and Catering
Technology
Electronics (Fiber Optics)
Electronics (Robotics)
Electronics instrumentation and
Control Engineering
C Manufacturing
Electronics and Communication
Engineering
Electronics Production and
Maintenance
ndustrial and Production
Engineering
ndustrial Electronics
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Industry Integrated)
Electronics Robotics
Electronics Technology
ndustrial Production Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Microwaves)
Electronics Tele Communication
Embedded Systems
nformation and Communication
Technology
Electronics and Communications
Engineering
Environmental Engineering
nformation Engineering
Fabrication Technology
nformation Science
Electronics and Communication
Technology
Fabrication Technology and
Erection Engineering
nformation Science and
Engineering
Fashion and Apparel Design
nformation Science and
Technology
115
--- Page 132 ---
Dairy Engineering
Design and Drafting Technology
Approval Process Handbook
Electronics and Computer
Engineering
Fashion and Apparel Design
Digital Electronics
Digital Electronics and
Microprocessor
Electronics and Electrical
Engineering
Fashion and Clothing Technology
Fashion and Design
Digital Manufacturing Technologies
Electronics and instrumentation
Engineering
Fashion Designing
Direction Screen Play Writing and
TV Production
Electronics and Telecommunication
Fashion Designing and Garment
Technology
Electronics and
Tele-Communication Engineering
Fashion Technology
Film and Video Editing
Dress Designing and Garment
Manufacturing
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering (Radio and System)
Film Technology and TV Production
(Cinematography)
Drilling Engineering
m
lectrical and Electronics (Power
stem)
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering (Technologynician
Electronic Radio)
Film Technology and TV Production
(Digital Intermediate) *
Finance Account and Auditing
S)
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
Electronics and
Telecommunications Engineering
Fire Technology and Safety
Electronics and Video Engineering
Fisheries Technology
lectrical and instrumentation
ngineering
ngineering
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering
Food Processing and Preservation
Food Processing Technology
Food Technology
E
E
Electrical and Mechanical
E
E
lectrical Engineering
Electronics Communication and
instrumentation Engineering
Footwear Technology
Foundry Technology
Electronics Engineering
Gaming and Animation
Electrical Engineering
(Electronics and Power)
Electronics Engineering
Garment and Fashion Technology
Electrical Engineering (Industrial
Control)
Electronics Engineering (Digital
Electronics
Garment Fabrication
Electrical Engineering
(Instrumentation and Control)
Electronics Engineering (Industry
integrated)
Garment Manufacturing
Technology
Garment Technology
lectrical Engineering and
lectric Vehicle Technology
Electronics Engineering (Micro
Electronics
lectrical Engineering industrial
lectrical Power System
E
E
E
Control
E
E
lectrical Power Systems
Electronics Engineering
Specialization in Consumer
Electronics
Geographic information System
(G.I.S.) and Global Positioning
System
Geo informatics
Glass and Ceramics Engineering
Handloom and Textile Technology
Electronics Engineering Modern
Consumer Electronics
Heat Power Engineering
Home Science
Electronic instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Electronics Engineering with
Microprocessor
Hotel Management and Catering
Technology
Electronic Science and Engineering
Electronics instrument and Control
IC Manufacturing
lectronics (Fiber Optics)
lectronics (Robotics)
Electronics instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Industrial and Production
Engineering
lectronics and Communication
ngineering
Electronics Production and
Maintenance
Industrial Electronics
lectronics and Communication
Electronics Robotics
Industrial Production Engineering
Electronics Technology
Information and Communication
Technology
lectronics and Communication
ngineering (Microwaves)
Electronics Tele Communication
Information Engineering
lectronics and Communications
ngineering
Embedded Systems
Information Science
Environmental Engineering
E
E
E
E
E
Engineering (Industry Integrated)
E
E
E
E
E
lectronics and Communication
Technology
Fabrication Technology
Information Science and
Engineering
Fabrication Technology and
Erection Engineering
Information Science and
Technology
116
--- Page 133 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Information Technology and
Engineering
ec
hanical Engineering (CAD)
Information Technology Enabled
Services and Management
Mec!
CAM)
hanical Engineering (CAD/
Office Management and Computer
Application
Ophthalmic Technology
Information Technology
Mec!
hanical Engineering (Foundry)
Opto-Electronics Engineering
Instrumentation and Control
Engineering
Mec!
hanical Engineering (Industry
ntegrated)
Packaging Technology
Instrumentation and Process
Control
Mec!
Tool
hanical Engineering (Machine
Maintenance and Repairs)
Paint Technology
Paper and Pulp Technology
Instrumentation Engineering
Mec!
hanical Engineering
Maintenance)
Paper Technology
Petrochemical Engineering
Mec!
hanical Engineering
Petrochemical Refinery
Instrumentation Technology Production) Petrochemical Technology
Instruments and Medical Mechanical Engineering Petroleum Engineering
Equipment Refrigeration and Air Petroleum Technology
Instrument Technology Conditioning) — Photography
Integrated Circuit (IC) Design and Mechanical Engineering (Repair Plastic and Mould Technology
Fabrication and Maintenance) F ___.
: : F Plastic and Polymer Engineering
Intatter Decencition Mechanical Engineering (Tool and - - -
Die) Plastic Engineering
Interior Design
Jewellery D ae d Manufact Mechanical Engineering Plastic Mould Technology
ewellery Design and Manufacture Automobile Plastic Technology
Technology = = =
Mechanical Engineering Computer Plastics Engineering
Knitting and Garment Technology
Knitting Technology
Aided Design/Computer Aided
Manufacturing
Plastics Mould Technology
Leather and Fashion Technology
Leather Goods and Footwear Tech
Mec
Plan
hanical Engineering Power
+ Engineering
Plastics Processing and Testing
Plastics Technology
Leather Technology Footwear
Computer Aided Shoe Design
Mec!
hanical Engineering Production
Polymer Technology
Leather Technology
Mec
Engi
hanical Engineering Tool
neering
Post Plastic Process and Testing
Power Electronics
Leather Technology Tanning
Library and information Science
Mec!
hanical Engineering,
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Precision Manufacturing
Logistics Technology
Machine Engineering
Mec
Engi
hanical Engineering Tube Well
neering
Printing and Packing Technology
Printing Technology
Machine Tools and Maintenance
Engineering
Mec!
Metal
hanical Welding and Sheet
Production and Industrial
Engineering
Machine Tools Technology
Mec!
hanical Welding and Sheet
Metal Engineering
Production Engineering
Maintenance Engineering
Mec!
hatronics
Quantity Surveying and
Construction Management
Manufacturing Engineering
Medical Electronics Engineering
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Manufacturing Technology
Medical Laboratory Technology
Renewable Energy
Marine Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Robotic Process Automation
Marine Engineering and Systems
Metallurgy
Robotics and Mechatronics
Marine Engineering and Systems
(Artificer Training)
Micro Electronics
Rubber Technology
Mine Engineering
Mass Communication
Mine Surveying
Saddlery Technology and Export
Management
Material Management
Mini
ng and Mine Surveying
Shipbuilding Engineering
Mechanical CAD/CAM
Mini
ng Engineering
Small Arms Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Multimedia Technology
Smart Agritech
Mechanical Engineering
(Automobile)
Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in
Mec!
hanical and Electrical
Smart and Sustainable
Transportation
Network Engineering
Sound Recording and Engineering
117
--- Page 134 ---
Sugar Technology
Surface Coating Technology
Approval Process Handbook
Textile Manufacturing and
Technology
Survey Engineering
Technician X-Ray Technology
Textile Manufacturing Technology
Telecommunication Engineering
Textile Marketing and Management
Telecommunication Technology
Textile Processing
Textile Chemistry
Textile Processing Technology
Textile Design
Textile Technology
Textile Designing
Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre)
Textile Designing Printing
Textile Engineering
Textile Technology (Textile Design
and Weaving)
Textile Manufactures
Tool and Die Engineering
Tool Die and Mould Making
Transportation Engineering
Transportation Engineering and
Management
Travel and Tourism
TV and Sound Engineering
Virtual and Augmented Reality
Water Technology and Health
Science
Weapons Engineering
Web Designing
Wood and Paper Technology
Wood Technology
Tool and Die Making
Climate Technology
11.2 Post Diploma in Engineering and Technology
Acoustic Survey
Advanced Die and Mould Making
Advanced Electrical Power System
Electronics Communication and
nstrumentation
Engineering
Plastics Processing and Testing
Advanced Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Environmental Engineering
Polymer Science and Rubber
Technology
Fire Technology and Safety
Advanced Mechatronics and
Industrial Automation
Food Technology
Post Plastic Mould Design
Forge Technology
Advanced Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning
Foundry Technology
Post Plastic Process and Testing
Automobile Engineering
Biotechnology Tissue Culture
Geographic information System
G.I.S.) and Global Positioning
System
Power Plant Engineering and Energy
Management
CAD/CAM
ndustrial Safety
Computer Aided Design and
Manufacture
ndustrial Safety and
Engineering
Production Engineering System
Technology
nformation Technology
Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning
Computer Aided Design
Manufacture and Engineering
nitting and Garment
Technology
Rubber Technology
Computer Applications
Mechanical Engineering
Software Testing
Computer Hardware and
Networking
Medical Electronics
Textile Processing
Petrochemical Engineering
Thermal Power Engineering
Computer Hardware
Maintenance and Networking
Plant Engineering
Tool and Die Engineering
Plastic Mould Design
Tool Design
Plastic Mould Design (CAD/CAM)
Electrical Engineering
Plastic Mould Technology
Town Planning and
Architecture
Plastic Technology
Web Designing
118
--- Page 135 ---
Approval Process Handbook
11.3. Under Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology
3-D Animation and Graphics
Additive Manufacturing
Ceramic Engineering and
Technology
Computer Science and Business
Systems
Advanced Mechatronics and
industrial Automation
Ceramics Engineering
Computer Science and Design*
Ceramic Technology
Aero Space Engineering
Aeronautical Engineering
Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering
Aerospace Engineering
Agricultural Engineering
Chemical and Electro Chemical
Engineering
Agricultural Technology
Chemical Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Artificial
Intelligence and Machine
Learning)
Agriculture Engineering
Aircraft Maintenance
Engineering
Chemical Engineering
(Desalination and Water
Treatment)
Computer Science and
Engineering (Artificial
Intelligence)
Airline Management
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and
Polymer)
Computer Science and
Engineering (Cyber Security)
Apparel and Production
Management
Chemical Technology
Applied Electronics and
Communications
Civil and Environmental
Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Data Science)
Applied Electronics and
instrumentation Engineering
Civil and infrastructure
Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Internet of Things
and Cyber Security Including Block
Chain Technology)
Architectural Assistantship
Civil and Rural Engineering
Architecture and Interior
Decoration
Civil and Water Management
Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Internet of Things)
Artificial Intelligence (Al) and Data
Science
Civil Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Networks)
Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning
Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)
Automation and Robotics
Civil Engineering (Environmental
Engineering)
Computer Science and
Engineering and Business
Systems
Automation Engineering
Civil Engineering and Planning
Computer Science and
information Technology
Automobile Engineering
Automobile Maintenance
Engineering
Civil Engineering Environment and
Pollution Control
Computer Science and Medical
Engineering
Civil Engineering with Computer
Application
Computer Science and Social
Sciences
Automotive Technology
Biochemical Engineering
Civil Environmental Engineering
Civil Technology
Computer Science and Systems
Engineering
Bioelectronics Engineering
Bioinformatics
Computer and Communication
Engineering
Computer Science and
Technology
Biomedical and Robotic
Engineering
Computer Engineering
Computer Technology
Biomedical Engineering
Computer Engineering
(Software Engineering)
Computing in Multimedia
Computing in Software
Biomedical instrumentation
Biotechnology
Computer Engineering and
Application
Construction Automation
Construction Engineering
Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering
Computer Networking
Building and Construction
Technology
Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics
Construction Engineering and
Management
Construction Technology
Carpet and Textile Technology
Cement and CeramicTechnology
Computer Science and
Biosciences
Construction Technology and
Management
Cyber Physical Systems
119
--- Page 136 ---
Approval Process Handbook
D
airy Engineering
D
airy Technology
Electronics and Computer
Science
Fire Engineering
D
Pl
igital Techniques For Design and
anning
Electronics and Control Systems
Fire Technology and Safety
D
yestuff Technology
lectrical and Computer
Electronics and Electrical
Engineering
Fisheries Engineering
Food Engineering and
Technology
E
Engineering
E
(
lectrical and Electronics
Power System)
Electronics and Instrumentation
Engineering
Food Processing and
Preservation
lectrical and Electronics
ngineering
Electronics and Power
Engineering
Food Processing Technology
Food Technology
lectrical and instrumentation
Electronics and
Telecommunication
Food Technology and
Management
ectrical and Power Engineering
Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering
Footwear Technology
Geo informatics
lectrical Engineering
E
E
E
Engineering
E
E
E
(
lectrical Engineering
Electronics and Power)
Electronics and
Tele-Communication
Engineering
Geospatial Technology and
Geoinformatics
E
Cc
ectrical instrumentation and
ontrol Engineering
Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering
Technologynician Electronic Radio)
Handloom and Textile
Technology
lectrical Power Engineering
lectrical, Electronics and Power
Electronics and
Telecommunications Engineering
ndustrial and Production
Engineering
ndustrial Biotechnology
ectronic Engineering
Electronics and Telematics
Engineering
ndustrial Engineering
E
E
Engineering
E
E
lectronic Instrumentation and
Electronics Communication and
ndustrial Engineering and
Management
ndustrial loT
ndustrial Production
Engineering
nformation and Communication
Technology
nformation Engineering
nformation Science and
Engineering
Control Engineering Instrumentation Engineering
Blesizontte Senco cml Electronics Design Technology
Engineering Electronics Engineering
Electronics and Biomedical Electronics Engineering (VLSI
Engineering Design and Technology)
Electronics and Communication Electronics Instrument and Control
(Gomes System Electronics Instrumentation and
ngineering) Control Engineering
Electronics and Communication Electronics System Engineering
Engineering (Advanced
Electronics Technology
nformation Science and
Technology
nformation Technology
nformation Technology and
Engineering
nstrumentation and Control
Engineering
nstrumentation and Electronics
nstrumentation Engineering
nstrumentation Technology
nstrument Technology
Jute and Fibre Technology
Leather Technology
Engineering
Communication Technology)
Electronics and Communication Energy and Environmental
Engineering (VLSI Design & Management
Technology) Energy Engineering
Electronics and Communication Environment Engineering
Engineering Environmental Engineering
Electronics and Communication EnvitanentaliSciencelanct
Engineering (Bio-Medical Engineering
Engineeri
ngineering) — Environmental Science and
Electronics and Communication Technology
Engineering (Industry Integrated) ey, j :
= — Facilities and Services Planning
Electronics and Communication Foshi aA
Engineering (Microwaves) SS oe ORD pare:
5 ==> Engineering
Electronics and Communication Fashion Technol
eabnallasyy ‘ashion Technology
Fibres and Textiles Processing
Electronics and Computer Technology
Logistics & Supply Chain
Management
Man Made Fibre Technology
Fire and Life Safety
Man-Made Textile Technology
120
Manufacturing Engineering
--- Page 137 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Manufacturing Engineering and
Technology
Manufacturing Process and
Automation Engineering
Oils, Oleochemicals and
Surfactants Technology
Rubber Technology
Safety and Fire Engineering
Oil Technology
Shipbuilding Engineering
Manufacturing Science and
Engineering
Optics and Optoelectronics
Silk Technology
Packaging Technology
Smart Agritech
Manufacturing Technology
Paint Technology
Marine Engineering
Marine Technology
Petrochem and Petroleum
Refinery Engineering
Smart and Sustainable Energy
Software Engineering
Material Science and Technology
Petrochem Engineering
Structural Engineering
Mechanical and Automation
Engineering
Petrochemical Engineering
Surface Coating Technology
Petrochemical Technology
Technical Textiles
Mechanical and Mechatronics
Engineering (Additive
Manufacturing)
Petroleum Engineering
Telecommunication Engineering
Petroleum Technology
Textile Chemistry
Mechanical and Rail Engineering
Mechanical and Smart
Manufacturing
Pharmaceutical Chemistry and
echnology
=|
Textile Engineering
Textile Plant Engineering
U
harmaceutical Engineering
Textile Processing
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Automobile
Pharmaceuticals and Fine
Chemical Technology
Textile Technology
Plastic and Polymer Engineering
Tool Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Industry Integrated)
U
lastic Technology
Climate Technology
Plastics Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Manufacturing Engineering)
Polymer Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Production)
Polymer Engineering and
Technology
Mechanical Engineering
Welding Technology)
Polymer Science and Chemical
Technology
Polymer Science and Technology
Mechanical Engineering
Automobile
Polymer Technology
Mechanical Engineering Design
Poultry Technology
Mechatronics Engineering
Power Electronics
Medical Electronics Engineering
Power Electronics and
instrumentation Engineering
Medical Lab Technology
Power Electronics Engineering
Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
Power Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Precision Manufacturing
Metallurgy
Printing and Packing Technology
Metallurgy and Material
Technology
Printing, Graphics and
Packaging
Mine Engineering
Printing Technology
Mining Engineering
Production and industrial
Engineering
Nano Science and Technology
Production Engineering
Nano Technology
Pulp Technology
Radio Physics and Electronics
Naval Architecture and Ship
Building Engineering
Robotics and Artificial
ntelligence
Nuclear Science and Technology
Robotics and Automation
Oil and Paint Technology
Rubber and Plastics Technology
121
--- Page 138 ---
11.4
Approval Process Handbook
List of Courses for Minor Degree/Hons. in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary/ Region Specific Areas
The Institutions/ Universities shall adopt the following nomenclature while offering the Hons. in Emerging/
Multidisciplinary/ Region Specific Areas:
Waste Technology
Chemical Engineering
Microgrid Technologies
Electrical Engineering
Energy Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Sustainability Engineering
Strategic Civil
Infrastructure
Coastal & Offshore
Engineering
Construction Technology
Underground Space
Utilization
Infrastructure Engineering
Environmental
Geotechnology
Earthquake Engineering
Waterways Transport
Engineering
Lean Construction
Technology
Civil Engineering
Genome Engineering
and
Technology
Precision Health
Technology
Organ Printing
Technology
Nutrition Technology
Drug Engineering
Cellular Agriculture
Biotechnology
Mining and Mineral
Processing
Mining Engineering
Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning
Computer Science and
Engineering; Electronics
and Communication
Engineering; Electronics
Engineering
Block chain
Cyber Security
Data Science
Internet of Things (loT)
Computer Science and
Engineering ;Electronics
and Communication
Engineering; Electronics
Engineering
Virtual and Augmented
Reality
Computer Science and
Engineering; Electronics
Engineering
Systems Engineering
Electronics Engineering;
Mechanical Engineering
Control Systems and
Sensors Technology
Electronics Engineering;
Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Smart Cities
Civil Engineering;
Electronics Engineering
Green Technology and
Sustainability Engineering
Civil Engineering;
Chemical Engineering
GIS and Remote Sensing
Electronics Engineering;
Civil Engineering
Computer Science &
Biology
Biotechnology; Computer
Science
Biosimilar Technology
Biotechnology; Chemical
Engineering
Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Electrical Engineering;
Computer Science and
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering;
Electronics and
Robotics Communication
Engineering; Electronics
Engineering
3D Printing Mechanical Engineering;
Civil Engineering
Electric Vehicles
Mechanical Engineering;
Electrical Engineering
Sensors Technology
Electronics and
Communication
Engineering, Electronics
Engineering, Computer
Science and Engineering,
Instrumentation
Engineering
Aqua-food Technology
Chemical Engineering;
Biotechnology
122
--- Page 139 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Sustainable Energy Applicable to any Innovation, Applicable to any
Engineering (SEE) discipline of Engineering Entrepreneurial and discipline of Engineering
and Technology Venture Development and Technology
Universal Human Values | Applicable to any VLSI Design & Technology | Applicable to any
(UHV) discipline of Engineering discipline of Engineering
and Technology and Technology
Indian Knowledge System | Applicable to any 5G and Advanced Applicable to any
(IKS) discipline of Engineering Technologies discipline of Engineering
and Technology and Technology
Advance Web Applicable to any Business Development, Applicable to all UG
Development discipline of Engineering Marketing and Finance programmes
and Technology
11.5
CementTechnology
Chemical Engineering (SugarTechnology)
Computer Applications
Computer Engineering and Application
Computer Hardware and Networking
Food, Drug and Cosmetics
Industrial Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Production)
Networking
Plastics Processing and Testing
Sugar Technology
Web Designing
(A) Post Graduate Diploma in Engineering and Technology
(B) Post Graduate Certificate in Engineering and Technology
Acoustic Survey
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
123
--- Page 140 ---
Approval Process Handbook
11.6 Post Graduate Degree in Engineering and Technology
Artificial Intelligence
Automotive Engineering
Civil Engineering
Advanced Communication and
information System
Automotive Systems
Advanced Computer Aided Design
Automotive Technology
Civil Engineering (Computer Aided
Structural Engineering)
Advanced Design and
Manufacturing
Aviation Technology
Avionics
Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)
Advanced Electrical Power System
Bio Electronics
Advanced Electronics
Biochemical Engineering
Civil Engineering (Environmental
and Pollution Control)
Advanced Electronics an
Communication Engineering
Biochemical Engineering and
Biotechnology
Civil Engineering (Environmental
Engineering)
Advanced Manufacturing and
Mechanical Systems Design
Bioinformatics
Civil Engineering (Transportation
Engineering)
Biomedical Electronics
Advanced Manufacturing Systems
Biomedical Engineering
Civil Engineering (Water
Management)
Advanced Manufacturing
Technology
Biomedical Instrumentation
Civil Environmental Engineering
Advanced Materials Technology
Biomedical Instrumentation and
Signal Processing
Civil(Water Resource Engineering)
Cloud Computing
Advanced Production Systems
Aero Dynamic Engineering
Biomedical Signal Processing and
instrumentation
Combat Equipment Technology
Aero Space Engineering
Biometrics and Cyber Security
Combat Vehicles (Mechanical
Engineering)
Aero Space Technology
Bioprocess Engineering
Aeronautical Engineering
Bioprocess Technology
Communication and Information
Systems
Agricultural Engineering
Biotechnology
Communication and Networking
Agricultural Science and
Technology
Biotechnology and Biochemical
Engineering
Communication and Signal
Process
Air Armament
Bridge and Tunnel Engineering
Apparel Technology
Building Construction Technology
Communication Control and
Networking
Applied Electronics
CAD/CAM
Communication Engineering
Applied Electronics and
Communication System
CAD/CAM Engineering
CAD/CAM Robotics
Communication Engineering and
Signal Processing
Applied Electronics and
Communications
CAD/CAM/CAE
Communication Networks
Applied Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering
Ceramic Engineering and
Technology
Communication Systems
Ceramics Engineering
Communication Technology and
Management
Applied instrumentation
Chemical and Biotechnology
Communications Engineering
Applied Mechanics
Chemical Engineering
Armament Engineering (Gun
Fitter)
Chemical Processing in Textiles
Computational Analysis in
Mechanical Science
Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science
Chemical Reaction Engineering
Computational Biology
Chemical Science and Technology
Computational Engineering and
Networking (Data Science)
Atmospheric Science
Chemical Technology
Computational Mechanics
Automated Manufacturing Systems
Automation
Chemical Technology (Rubber/
Plastic)
Computational Mechanics
(Mechanical Engineering)
Automation and Control Power
Systems
Civil (Construction Engineering
and Management)
Computer Aided Analysis and
Design
Automation and Robotics
Civil (Public Health and
Environment) Engineering
Computer Aided Design
Automobile Engineering
Civil (Structural Engineering)
Computer Aided Design and
Computer Aided Manufacture
Automobile Technology
Automotive Electronics
Civil and Environmental
Technology
Computer Aided Design and
Manufacture
124
--- Page 141 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Computer Aided Design
Manufacture and Automation
Computer Science and
Engineering (Cyber Security)
Data Sciences
Computer Aided Design
Manufacture and Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering (Networks)
Defence Technology #
Design and Production
Computer Aided Design of
Structures
Computer Science and
Engineering (Operations Research)
Design and Thermal Engineering
Design Engineering
Computer Aided Process Design
Computer Aided Structural
Analysis and Design
Computer Science and
nformation Security
Design for Manufacturing
Design of Mechanical Equipment
Computer Aided Structural
Engineering
Computer Science and
nformation System
Design of Mechanical Systems
Computer and Communication
Computer Science and
nformation Technology
Digital Communication
Computer and Communication
Engineering
Computer Science and Systems
Engineering
Digital Communication
Engineering
Digital Communications
Computer and information
Science
Computer Science Engineering
Big Data Analytics)
Digital Communications and
Networking
Computer and Information
Technology
Computer Systems and Technology
Digital Electronics
Computer Technology
Computer Applications
Computer Applications in
Industrial Drives
Computer Technology and
Applications
Digital Electronics and
Communication
Computer Cognition and
Technology
Computer Vision and Image
Processing
Digital Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Computing in Computing
Digital Electronics and
Communication Systems
Computer Engineering
Computer Engineering (Software
Engineering)
Construction and Project
Management
Digital Electronics Engineering
Digital Image Processing
Construction Engineering
Digital Instrumentation
Computer Engineering and
Application
Construction Engineering and
Management
Digital Signal Processing
Digital Systems
Computer Engineering and
Networking
Construction Management
Computer Hardware and
Networking
Construction Planning and
Management
Digital Systems and
Communications Engineering
Computer integrated
Manufacturing
Construction Project Management
Digital Systems and Computer
Electronics
Construction Technology
Computer Network Engineering
Computer Networ!
ine
Construction Technology and
Management
Digital Techniques and
instrumentation
Distributed and Mobile Computing
Computer Networking and
Engineering
Control and Instrument
Distributed Computing Systems
Control and Instrumentation
Distributed Systems
Computer Networks
Control Engineering
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals
Computer Networks and
information Security
Control System Engineering
Dyestuff Technology
Control Systems
Earthquake Engineering
Computer Networks and internet
Security
Course Name
E-LearningTechnologies
Cryogenic Engineering
Electric Power System
Computer Science
Cyber Forensics
lectric Vehicle Technology
Computer Science and
Technology
Cyber Forensics and information
Security
lectrical and Electronics (Power
stem)
Computer Science and
Engineering
Cyber Security
Computer Science and
Engineering (Artificial Intelligence
and Machine Learning)
Cyber Security Systems and
Networks
ngineering
Dairy Technology
lectrical and Mechanical
ngineering
Data Engineering
E
E
Si
Electrical and Electronics
E
E
E
E
ectrical and Power Engineering
125
--- Page 142 ---
Electrical Devices and Power
Systems
Approval Process Handbook
lectronics and instrumentation
ngineering
Engineering Design
Electrical Drives and Control
Electrical Energy Systems
Electrical Engineering
Electrical Engineering (Electronics
and Power)
Electrical Engineering
Instrumentation and Control)
Electrical instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Electrical Machines
Electrical Machines and Drives
Electrical Power Engineering
Electrical Power System
Electronic Circuits and System
Design
Electronic Engineering
Electronic instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Communication System
Engineering)
lectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Radio and System)
Engineering Education
Engineering Statistics
lectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Technologynician
lectronic Radio)
Environment and Water Resource
Engineering
Environment Engineering
lectronics and
ele-Communication Engineering
—am|mmm\i|mm\imm
Environmental Biotechnology
Environmental Engineering
lectronics and
elecommunications Engineering
—1 im
Environmental Engineering and
Management
Electronics Communication and
Instrumentation Engineering
Environmental Management
Electronics Design and Technology
Environmental Science and
Engineering
lectronics Design Technology
lectronics Engineering
Environmental Science and
Technology
E
E
Electronics Product Design and
Technology
E-Security
Farm Machinery
Electronics Systems and
Communication
Fashion and Apparel Engineering
Electronics Technology
Fashion Technology
Electronics Tele Communication
Financial Engineering
Embedded and Real Time Systems
Food Biotechnology
Electronics and Communication
Signal Processing and
Communication)
Electronics and Communication
Signal Processing and VLSI
Technology)
Electronics and Communication
(VLSI Design)
Electronics and Communication
(VLSI System Design)
Electronics and Communication
(Wireless Communication Systems
and Networks)
Electronics and Communication
‘Wireless Communication
Technology)
Embedded Control and
Automation
Food Engineering and Technology
Embedded Control Systems
Food Plant Operations
Management
Embedded System and Computing
Food Process Engineering and
Management
Embedded System and VLSI
Food Processing Technology
Embedded System and VLSI
Design
Food Safety and Quality
Management
Embedded Systems
Food Supply Chain Management
Embedded Systems Technologies
Food Technology
Energetic Materials and Polymers
Energy and Environmental
Engineering
Food Technology and
Management
Footwear Science and Engineering
Energy and Environmental
Management
Foundation Engineering
Energy Engineering
Foundry and Forge Technology
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Advanced
Communication Technology)
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (VLSI Design &
Technology)
Electronics and Communication
Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Engineering(Industry integrated)
Electronics and Electrical
Technology
Energy Management
Fracture Mechanics
Energy Science and Technology
Fuel and Combustion
Energy Systems
Future Studies and Planning
Energy Systems Analysis and
Design
Gas Turbine Technology
Geo Informatics
Energy Systems and Management
Energy Systems Engineering
Geo Informatics and Surveying
Technology
Energy Technology and
Management
Geoinformatics and Earth
Observation
Energy Technology
Geomachines and Structures
Engineering Analysis and Design
Geomechanics and Structures
Engineering and Management
Geotechnical and Geo
environmental Energy
126
--- Page 143 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Geotechnical Earthquake
Engineering
ndustrial Metallurgy
Geotechnical Engineering
ndustrial Pollution Control
Internal Combustion Engines and
Turbo Machinery
Geo technology
ndustrial Power Control and
Drives
Internet of Things
loT and Sensor Systems
Green Energy Technology
Green Technology
Guidance and Navigation Control
ndustrial Refrigeration and
Cryogenics
Irrigation and Drainage
Engineering
Guided Missiles
ndustrial Safety
Irrigation Engineering
Health Science andWater
Engineering
ndustrial Safety and Engineering
Irrigation Water Management
ndustrial Structures
Laser and Electro Optics
Heat and Power
ndustrial System and Drives
Laser Technology
Heat Power and Thermal
Engineering
ndustrial Systems Engineering
Lean Manufacturing Engineering
Heat Power Engineering
nformation and Communication
Technology
Leather Technology
Heat Ventilation and Air
Conditioning
nformation Engineering
Logistics & Supply Chain
Management
High Voltage and Power Systems
Engineering
nformation Science and
Technology
Machine Design
Machine Design and Robotics
nformation Security
Maintenance Engineering
High Voltage Engineering
nformation Security Management
Man-Made Textile Technology
Highway Engineering
nformation Systems
Manufacturing and Automation
Highway Technology
nformation Technology
Manufacturing Engineering
Hill Area Development
Engineering
nformation Technology (Artificial
ntelligence and Robotics)
Manufacturing Engineering and
Automation
Hydraulics and Flood Control
Hydraulics Engineering
nformation Technology
Information and Cyber Warfare)
Manufacturing Engineering and
Management
Hydrology and Water Resources
Engineering
nformation Technology and
Engineering
Manufacturing Engineering and
Technology
|.T. (Courseware Engineering)
Illumination Engineering
nformation Technology
Multimedia)
Manufacturing Process
Illumination Technology and
Design
nfrastructure Engineering
Manufacturing Process and
Automation Engineering
Image Processing
nfrastructure Engineering and
Management
Manufacturing Science and
Engineering
Industrial and Production
Engineering
nfrastructure Engineering and
Technology
Manufacturing Systems and
Management
Industrial Automation and RF
Engineering
nfrastructure Management
Industrial Automation and Robotics
nstrumentation and Control
(Applied Instrumentation)
Manufacturing Systems
Engineering
Manufacturing Technology
Industrial Biotechnology
Industrial Catalysis
nstrumentation and Control
Engineering
Manufacturing Technology and
Automation
Industrial Design
nstrumentation and Electronics
Marine Engineering
Industrial Drives and Control
nstrumentation Engineering
Marine Technology
Industrial Electronics
nstrumentation Technology
Material Engineering
Industrial Engineering
ntegrated Circuits Technology
Industrial Engineering and
Management
ntegrated Power Systems
Material Engineering
(Nanotechnology)
Industrial Instrumentation and
Control
ntegrated Water Resources
Management
Material Handling
ntelligent Systems
Material Science and Chemical
Technology
Industrial Intelligent Systems
Industrial Mathematics
nternal Combustion and
Automobiles
Material Science and Engineering
Material Science and Technology
nternal Combustion Engineering
Materials Engineering
127
--- Page 144 ---
Measurement and Control
Approval Process Handbook
Micro Electronics
Mechanical (Computer Aided
Design, Manufacture and
Engineering)
Micro Electronics and Control
Systems
Oils, Oleo chemicals and
Surfactants Technology
Optical Engineering
Mechanical (Computer Integrated
Manufacturing)
Micro Electronics and VLSI Design
Optics and Optoelectronics
Mechanical (I.C. Engine and
Automobile Engineering)
Micro Electronics and VLSI
Technology
Opto-Electronics and
Communication
Micro Electronics Engineering
Mechanical and Automation
Engineering
Microelectronics and VLSI Design
Opto-Electronics and
Communication Systems
Mechanical and Materials
Technology
Microwave and Communication
Engineering
Optoelectronics and Laser
Technology
Mechanical Engineering
Microwave and Millimeter
Engineering
Opto-Electronics Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (CAD)
Microwave and Optical
Communication
Opto-Electronics- Optical
Communication
Mechanical Engineering (CAD/
CAM)
Microwave and Radar Engineering
Packaging Technology
Mechanical Engineering (Cyber
Physical Systems)
Microwave and TV Engineering
Paint Technology
Microwave Engineering
Parallel Distributed Systems
Mechanical Engineering (Energy
System and Management)
Microwaves
Perfumery and Flavour Technology
Mining Engineering
Pervasive Computing Technology
Mechanical Engineering (Industry
ntegrated)
Mobile Communication and
Network Technology
Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Manufacturing Technology)
Mobile Computing
Petrochemical Engineering
Mobile Computing Technology
Petrochemical Technology
Mechanical Engineering
Production)
Mobile Technology
Petroleum Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Thermal
Engineering)
Modeling and Simulation
Mechanical Engineering
Automobile
Modern Communication
Engineering
Petroleum Refining and
Petrochemicals
Petroleum Technology
Mechanical Engineering Design
Multimedia and Software
Engineering
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
Mechanical Engineering
Production
Multimedia Technology
Pharmaceutical Chemistry and
Technology
Nano Science and Technology
Mechanical Engineering-Product
Design and Development
Nano Technology
Pharmaceuticals and Fine
Chemical Technology
Network Engineering
Physical Metallurgy
Mechanical System Design
Mechanical Welding and Sheet
Metal Engineering
Network infrastructure
Management
Plant Design
Plastic Engineering
Plastics Engineering
Mechanical-Manufacturing
Engineering
Network Security and
Management
Plastics Processing and Testing
Mechanical-Product Life Cycle
Management
Networ
ing
Plastics Technology
Polymer Engineering
Mechatronics
Networking and Internet
Engineering
Polymer Nanotechnology
Medical Electronics
Neural Networks
Polymer Science and Engineering
Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
New Material Process and
Technology
Polymer Science and Technology
Polymer Technology
Metallurgical Engineering
Non-Sewered Sanitation
Power and Energy Engineering
Metallurgy
Nuclear Engineering
Power and Energy System
Metallurgy and Material
Technology
Nuclear Science and Technology
Power and Industrial Drives
Ocean Technology
Power Control and Drives
Power Electronics
Micro and Nano Electronics
Oil Technology
Power Electronics and Control
128
--- Page 145 ---
Approval Process Handbook
11.1 Diploma in Engineering and Technology
Power Electronics and Drives
Power Electronics and Drives in
Electrical Engineering
Production and Industrial
Engineering
Smart Sensing Communication
and Networking Technologies
Software Engineering
Power Electronics and Electrical
Drives
Production Design and
Manufacturing
Software Systems
Power Electronics and Machine
Drives
Production Engineering
Soil and Water Conservation
Engineering
Power Electronics and Power
Systems
Production Engineering and
Engineering Design
Soil Mechanics
Power Electronics and Systems
Power Electronics Engineering
Production Engineering System
Technology
Soil Mechanics and Foundation
Engineering
Power Engineering
Production Management
Solar Energy
Solar Power Systems
Power Engineering and Energy
Systems
Production Technology
Spatial Information Technology
Power Plant Engineering and
Energy Management
Production Technology and
Management
Sports Technology
Project Management
Structural and Construction
Engineering
Power System and Control
Propulsion Engineering
Structural and Foundation
Engineering
Power System and Control
Automation
Public Health Engineering
Structural Design
Power System Control and
Automation
Quality Engineering and
Management
Structural Dynamics and
Earthquake Engineering
Radar and Communication
Structural Engineering
Power System with Emphasis H.V.
Engineering
Radio Frequency and Microwave
Engineering
Structural Engineering and
Construction
Power Systems
Radio Physics and Electronics
Power Systems and Automation
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Structural Engineering and
Construction Management
Power Systems and Power
Electronics
Reliability Engineering
Surface Coating Technology
Remote Sensing
System and Network Security
Power Systems and Renewable
Energy
Remote Sensing and GIS
System Management
Power Systems Control and
Automation Engineering
Remote Sensing and Wireless
Sensor Networks
System Software
Systems and Signal Processing
Power Systems Engineering
Renewable Energy
Technical Textile
Pre Stressed Concrete
Robotics and Artificial Intelligence
Technology Management
Printing and packaging
Technology
Robotics and Automation
Telecommunication Engineering
Robotics and Mechatronics
Telematics
Printing Engineering and Graphics
Communication
Rocket Propulsion
Textile Chemistry
Rubber Technology
Textile Engineering
Printing Technology
Process and Food Engineering
Rural Technology
Textile Processing
Process Control
Science in Software Engineering
Textile Processing Technology
Process Control instrumentation
Scientific Computing
Textile Technology
Process Dynamics and Control
Process instrumentation
Seismic Design and Earthquake
Engineering
Textile Technology (Design and
Manufacturing)
Process Metallurgy
Sensor Technology
Thermal and Fluid Engineering
Product Design
Signal Processing
Thermal Engineering
Product Design and Commerce
Product Design and Development
Signal Processing and
Communications
Thermal Engineering (Refrigeration
and Air Conditioning)
Product Design and Manufacturing
Signal Processing and Embedded
Systems
Thermal Power Engineering
Thermal Science Engineering
129
--- Page 146 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Wired and Wireless
Communication
Wireless and Mobile
Communications
Translational Engineering
Transport Science and Technology
Transportation Engineering
Transportation Engineering and
Management
Transportation System Engineering
Tribology and Maintenance
Turbo Machinery
Urban Engineering
Wireless Communication and
Computing
Thermal Sciences and Energy VLSI and Microelectronics
Systems VLSI Design
Thermal Systems and Design VLSI Design and Embedded
Tool Design Systems
Tool Engineering VLSI Design and Signal Processing
Town and Country Planning VLSI Design and Testing
Traffic and Transporting WS) Seiam Besta
Engineering
VLSI Systems
Waste Water Management, Health
and Safety Engineering
Wireless Communication
Technology
Water and Environmental
Technology
Wireless Communications
Water Engineering and
Management
Wireless Networks and
Applications
Wireless Technology
Water Resource Engineering
Water Resource Management
Climate Technology
Water Resources and
Environmental Engineering
Virtual Proto typing and Digital
Manufacturing
Water Resources and Hydraulic
Engineering
VLSI
VLSI and Embedded Systems
VLSI and Embedded Systems
Design
Water Resources and
Hydroinformatics
Weapons Engineering
Web Technologies
#Only as a Collaborative Course in association with DRDO. More details about this Course and similar courses
which can be offered in collaborative mode is available@www.aicte-india.org.
NOTE: All PG programs being specialized and Emerging in the respective engineering branches, are permitted as
Emerging/ Multidisciplinary areas. Institutions/Universities are expected to revise the curricula regularly for being
industry relevant in line with NEP 2020.
11.7. Under Graduate Degree in Planning
Planning
11.8 Post Graduate Degree in Planning
City and Regional Planning and Industrial Area Planning and Town and Country Planning
Management Management
Town Planning
City Planning nfrastructure Planning Transport Planning and
Management
City Planning and Management nfrastructure Planning and
Management
Community Planning Transportation Planning
Land-Use Planning
Conservation Planning Urban and Regional Planning
Regional and Rural Development
Environmental Planning mia
anning
Urban and Rural Planning
Environmental Planning and
Management
Urban Design
Regional Planning
Urban Development
Rural Planning and Development
Housing Urban Planning
Rural Planning and Management
130
--- Page 147 ---
Approval Process Handbook
11.9 Diploma in Applied Arts & Crafts and Design
Apparel Design and FabricationTechnology
Fashion and Apparel Design
Apparel Design and Fashion Technology
Art for Drawing Teacher
Fashion Designing
Beauty and Hair Dressing
Fashion Technology
Beauty Culture
Fine Arts
Beauty Culture and Cosmetology
Garment Technology
Commercial Art
Home Science
Cosmetology
nterior Decoration
Costume Design and Dress Making
nterior Design
Costume Design and Garment Technology
Craft Technology
11.10 Post Diploma in Applied Arts and Crafts
Fine Arts
Textile Designing
Textile Design
Fashion Design and Garment Technology
Textile Designing
Travel and Tourism
11.11 Under Graduate Degree in Applied Arts and Crafts
Accessory Design
Animation
Applied Arts
Applied Arts and Crafts (Fashion and Apparel Design)
AR and CR for Films
Audiography
Cinematography
Commercial Art
Digital Imaging
Fashion and Apparel Design
Film and Media
Film and Television
Film Direction
Film Editing
Fine Art (Photography)
Fine Art (Sculpture)
Fine Arts
Gaming Technology
Media Production Management
Painting
Product Design
Screen Acting
Script Writing
Sound Recording and Sound Design
Television
Fine Art (Animation)
Textile Design
Fine Art (Ceramics)
Virtual Production
Fine Art (Metal Craft)
Visual Effects
131
--- Page 148 ---
11.12 Post Graduate Degree in Applied Arts and Craft
Advertisement and Public Relation
Applied Art (Communication Design)
Applied Art (Illustration)
Applied Art (Visual Communication Design)
Applied Arts
Customer Service Management
Direction
Electronic Cinematography
Fashion Technology
Feature Film Screenplay Writing
Film Archiving
11.13 Under Graduate Degree in Design
Approval Process Handbook
Film Studies
Fine Art (Mural)
Fine Art (Painting)
Fine Art (Photography and Media Communication)
Fine Art (Sculpture)
Fine Arts
Painting Mural
Sound Recording and Television Engineering
Video Editing
Visual Communication and Communication Design
Communication Design
Design
Fashion Communication
Fashion Design
Industrial Design
Interaction Design
11.14 Post Graduate Degree in Design
Animation Design
Interior Design
Jewellery Design
Life Style and Accessory Design
Textile Design
Heritage Design
Animation Film Design
Human Centered Design
Apparel Design
Business Design
Business Services and System Design
Ceramic and Glass Design
Communication Design
Creative and Applied Computation
Design Computation
Design Education
Design for Retail Experience
Design Led Innovation
Design Management
Digital Game Design
Digital Humanities
Earth Education and Communication
Exhibition Design
Experimental Media Arts
Fashion Design
Fashion Management and Marketing
Film and Video Communication
Film and Video Design
Graphic Design
132
mmersive Media Design
ndustrial Arts and Design Practices
nformation Arts and Information Design Practice
nformation Design
nteraction Design
Lifestyle Accessory Design
Media Arts
New Media Design
Photography Design
Product Design
Public Space Design
Social Design
Textile Design
Toy and Game Design
Transportation and Mobility Design
Universal Design
User Experience Design
Visual Communication and Strategic Branding
--- Page 149 ---
Handbook
Approval Process
11.15 Diploma in Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Food Technology
Hospitality and Tourism Administration
Hotel Management
Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Travel and Tourism
Culinary Arts
Hospitality and Tourism Administration
Hotel Management
Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Food and Beverage Management
Hospitality and Tourism Administration
Hotel Management
BCA
MCA
11.19 (a) Under Graduate Degree in Management
BBA / BMS
Programme in Management
Advertising and Marketing Communication
11.18 (b) Post Graduate Degree in Computer Applications
11.16 Under Graduate Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology
11.17 Post Graduate Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology
11.18 (a) Under Graduate Degree in Computer Applications
11.19 (b) Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree/ Fellow
Business Administration
Business Analytics
Advertising and Public Relation
Business and Corporate Law
Agribusiness and Plantation Management
Business Design and Innovation
Agribusiness Management
Business Economics
Agricultural Export and Business Management
Business Management
Airport Management
Communications
Analytics
Consultancy Management
Apparels
Corporate Communication and Event Management
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science
Corporate Social Responsibility
Aviation and Airport Management
Cyber Law
Aviation Management
Design Thinking
Banking and Finance Management
Dietetics
Banking and Financial Services
Digital Marketing
Big Data Analytics
Digital Media and Marketing Communications
Biotechnology
Digital Media and Online Journalism
133
--- Page 150 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Disaster Management
International Trade Management
E- Business Management
Jute Technology and Management
Energy Management
Land Governance
Entrepreneurship
Law
Environmental Management
Logistics and Supply Chain Management
Event Management
Management
Export and Import Management
Manufacturing Management
Family Managed Business
Marketing and Finance
Fashion Technology
Marketing and Sales Management
Finance Marketing and Human Resource Management
Marketing Management
Financial Administration
Mass Communication
Financial Management
Materials Management
Financial Services
Media and Entertainment
Fintech
Operations Management
Food Processing and Business Management
Personnel Administration
Foreign Trade
Pharmaceutical Management
Forestry Management
Project Management
Geo Spatial Technology Application in Rural
Development
Public Policy and Management
Government Accounting and Internal Audit
Public Systems
Health Care Administration
Real Estate Management
Health Care and Hospital Management
Retail Management
Healthcare Management
Rural Management
Heritage Management
Securities Market
Home Textiles
Services Management
Hospital Administration
Shipping and Logistics Management
Hospital and Health Care Management
Social Enterprise Management
Hospital Management
Sports Management
Hospitality Management
Sustainability Management
Human Resource Development
Technical Textile Management
Human Resource Development and Management
Technology Management
Human Resource Management
Telecom Management
ndustrial Safety and Environmental Management
Television and Radio Journalism / Production
nformation Communication Technology in Securities
Market
Textile Management
Tourism Management
nformation Management
Transport and Logistics Management
nformation Technology
Transport Economics and Management
nformation Technology and Systems Management
Travel and Tourism
nfrastructure Management
Tribal Development
nnovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture
Development (IEV)*
Waste Management and Social Entrepreneurship
nsurance and Risk Management
Water and River Management
nternational Business
Power Management
nomenclature will
PGDM / MBA without any specialization in bracket refers general management ONLY. Hence, the GENERAL
not be available for PGDM / MBA. However, MBA institutions can opt if their
affiliating University has already granted this nomenclature. Institutions should use/name the course as PGDM/
MBA and put specialized nomenclature as approved in brackets for all practical purposes/communication.
*Approval shall be based on the fulfilment of eligibility criteria specified by the MoE’s Innovation Cell
134
--- Page 151 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Core Branches for Under Graduate Degree in Engineering & Technology :
Agricultural Engineering
Smart Agritech
Agricultural Technology
Agriculture Engineering
Automobile Engineering
Civil Engineering with Computer
Application
Civil Engineering and Planning
Structural Engineering
Computer Science and Information
Technology
Computer Science and Systems
Engineering
Civil Environmental Engineering
Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)
Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering
Automobile Maintenance
Engineering
Automotive Technology
Mechanical Engineering
(Automobile)
Mechanical Engineering
Automobile
Chemical and Electro Chemical
Engineering
Biochemical Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and
Polymer)
Chemical Engineering
(Desalination and Water
Treatment)
Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering
Civil Technology
Construction Automation
Construction Engineering
Construction Engineering and
Management
Construction Technology
Construction Technology and
Management
Advanced Computer Application
Computer and Communication
Engineering
Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics
Computer Engineering
Computer Engineering (Software
Engineering)
Computer Engineering and
Application
Computer Science and Biosciences
Computer Science and
Engineering (Networks)
Computer Technology
Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Electronics and Computer Science
Electronics and Computer
Engineering
Mathematics and Computing
Software Engineering
lectrical and Computer
ngineering
mm
Electrical and Electronics (Power
System)
lectrical and Electronics
ngineering
lectrical Power Engineering
ngineering
lectrical, Electronics and Power
E
E
E
Electrical and Instrumentation
E
E
Engineering
Electrical and Mechanical
Chemical Technology Computer Science and Design Engineering
Petrochem Engineering Computer Networking Electrical and Power Engineering
Dye Stuff Technology
Rubber Technology
Rubber and Plastics Technology
Dyestuff Technology
Surface Coating Technology
Building and Construction
Technology
Civil and Rural Engineering
Civil Engineering
Computer Science and
Engineering
Computer Science and Social
Sciences
Computer Science
Computer Science and Business
Systems
m
lectrical Engineering
Electrical Engineering (Electronics
and Power)
Electrical Engineering Industrial
Control
Electrical Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Computer Science and Medical
Engineering
Computer Science and Technology
Computer Science and
Engineering and Business Systems
135
m
lectrical, Electronics and Power
lectronics and Computer Science
ngineering
E
Electronics and Electrical
E
E
lectronics and Power Engineering
--- Page 152 ---
Biomedical Engineering
Approval Process Handbook
Applied Electronics and
Communications
Digital Techniques for Design and
Planning
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
Electronics and Biomedical
Engineering
Food Engineering and Technology
Biomedical Engineering
Food Processing and Preservation
Electrical, Electronics and Power
Electronic Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Bio-Medical
Engineering)
Food Processing Technology
Food Technology
Electronic Science and Engineering
Electronics
Electronics and Computer Science
Electronics and Communication
(Communication System
Engineering)
Electronics and Computer
Engineering
Communication Engineering
Food Technology and
Management
Industrial and Production
Engineering
Electronics and Control Systems
lectronics and Communication
echnology
—1 1m
Industrial Production Engineering
Industrial Engineering
Electronics and Electrical
Engineering
m
lectronics and Communication
ngineering
m
Electronics and Power Engineering
Electronics Engineering (VLSI
Design and Technology)
m
lectronics and Communication
ngineering (Industry Integrated)
m
Electronics and Tele-
Communication Engineering
Industrial Engineering and
Management
Information and Communication
Technology
Information Engineering
Electronics Design Technology
Electronics Instrument and Control
lectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Technologynician
Information Science and
Engineering
Electronics Engineering
lectronics and
E
E
Electronic Radio)
E
Telecommunications Engineering
Information Science and
Technology
Electronics System Engineering
Electronics Technology
Electronics and Telecommunication
Information Technology
Power Electronics
m
lectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering
m
Power Electronics Engineering
Radio Physics and Electronics
Advanced Communication and
Information System
m
lectronics and Telecommunication
ngineering (Technologynician
lectronic Radio)
mm
Information Technology and
Engineering
Applied Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering
Automation Engineering
Biomedical Instrumentation
m
lectronics and Communication
ngineering (Microwaves)
m
Electrical Engineering Industrial
Contro|
Electronics Communication and
Instrumentation Engineering
Electrical Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Advanced Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Electronics and Telematics
Engineering
Electronic Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Electronics and Instrumentation
Engineering
Telecommunication Engineering
Applied Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering
136
--- Page 153 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Electronics and Instrumentation
Engineering
Electronics Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
Power Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering
Electronics and Control Systems
Electronics Communication and
nstrumentation Engineering
Electronics Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
nstrument Technology
nstrumentation
nstrumentation and Control
Engineering
nstrumentation and Electronics
nstrumentation Engineering
nstrumentation Technology
Power Electronics and
nstrumentation Engineering
Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Industry
Integrated)
Additive Manufacturing
Mechanical Engineering
(Automobile)
Mechanical Engineering (Welding
Technology)
Mechanical and Mechatronics
Engineering (Additive
Manufacturing)
Material Science and Technology
Metallurgical and Materials
Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Metallurgy
Metallurgy and Material
Technology
Mine Engineering
Mining Engineering
Fibres and Textiles Processing
Technology
Jute and Fibre Technology
Man Made Fibre Technology
Carpet and Textile Technology
Man-Made Textile Technology
Silk Technology
Technical Textiles
Handloom and Textile Technology
Mechanical Engineering
(Manufacturing Engineering)
Facilities and Services Planning
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical Engineering Design
Mechanical and Rail Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Repair
and Maintenance)
Power Engineering
Textile Engineering
Textile Plant Engineering
Textile Processing
Textile Technology
137
--- Page 154 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Core Branches for Diploma in Engineering & Technology :
Agricultural Engineering
Agricultural Technology
Automobile Engineering
Automobile Engineering
(Automobile Fitter)
Automotive Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
(Automobile)
Mechanical Engineering Auto
Mobile
Energy Systems Engineering
Heat Power Engineering
Maintenance Engineering
Chemical Engineering
Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer)
Chemical Engineering (Oil
Technology)
Chemical Engineering (Petro
Chemical)
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and
Polymer)
Chemical Engineering (Sugar
Technology)
Chemical Engineering
Chemical Technology
Chemical Technology (Paint
Technology)
Chemical Technology (Rubber and
Plastic Technology)
Chemical Technology Fertilizer
Chemical Technology (Rubber/
Plastic)
Surface Coating Technology
Technical Chemistry
Civil and Rural Engineering
Civil (SFS Mode)
Civil Draftsman
Civil Engineering
Civil Engineering and Planning
Civil Engineering (Building Services
Engineering)
Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)
Civil Engineering (Construction)
Civil Engineering (Rural
Engineering)
Civil Technology
Construction Engineering
Construction Technology
Construction Technology and
Management
Quantity Surveying and
Construction Management
Survey Engineering
Computer Science and Systems
Engineering
Computer Software Technology
Computer Technology
Computer Technology and
Applications
Computer Applications
Network Engineering
Electronics and Computer
Engineering
Electrical and Electronics (Power
System)
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
Electrical and Instrumentation
Engineering
Transportation Engineering
Advanced Computer Application
Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering
Electrical and Power Engineering
Campus Wide Network Design
and Maintenance
Electrical Energy Systems
Computer Hardware and
Networking
Electrical Engineering
(Instrumentation and Control)
Computer Applications
Computer Engineering
Computer Engineering and
Application
Computer Hardware and
Maintenance
Electrical Engineering
Electrical Engineering (Electronics
and Power)
Electrical Engineering (Industrial
Control)
Computer Hardware and
Networking
Electrical Machines
Computer Networking
Computer Science and
Engineering
Computer Science
Electrical Power Systems
Power Systems Engineering
Computer Science and Technology
Electronics and Electrical
Engineering
138
--- Page 155 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Applied Electronics
Electronics Engineering With
Microprocessor
Electronics Production and
Maintenance
Digital Electronics
Electronics Technology
Digital Electronics and
Microprocessor
Industrial Electronics
Digital Systems
Micro Electronics
Electrical and Electronics (Power
System)
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
Electrical and Electronics
Engineering
Electrical Engineering (Electronics
and Power)
Electronic Engineering
Electronic Science and Engineering
Electronics
Electronics and Avionics
Electronics and Production
Electronics and Video Engineering
Electronics and Computer
Engineering
Electronics and Electrical
Engineering
Electronics Engineering
Power Electronics
Digital Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Engineering
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Industry Integrated)
Electronics and Communication
Technology
Advanced Communication and
Information System
Advanced Electronics and
Communication Engineering
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering (Technology electronic
Radio)
Digital Communications
Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Microwaves)
Electronics and Telecommunication
Engineering (Radio and System)
Electronics Communication and
Instrumentation Engineering
Electronics Engineering (Industry
Integrated)
Electronics Engineering (Micro
Electronics)
Electronics Engineering (Modern
Consumer Electronics)
Electronics Engineering
(Specialization in Consumer
Electronics)
Telecommunication Engineering
Telecommunication Technology
TV and Sound Engineering
Information and Communication
Technology
139
Food Processing and Preservation
Food Processing Technology
Food Technology
ndustrial Engineering
nformation and Communication
Technology
nformation Engineering
nformation Science and
Engineering
nformation Science and
Technology
nformation Technology
nformation Technology and
Engineering
Applied Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering
Automation Engineering
Control and Instrumentation
Biomedical Instrumentation
ectrical and Instrumentation
E
Engineering
Electrical Engineering
(Instrumentation and Control)
Electronic Instrumentation and
Control Engineering
m
lectronics and Instrumentation
ngineering
m
Electronics Communication and
Instrumentation Engineering
--- Page 156 ---
Approval Process Handbook
nstrument Technology Drilling Technology Knitting Technology
nstrumentation “le rginering Textile Chemistry
nstrumentation and Control
Engineering Instrumentation
Apparel Design and Fabric Textile Design
Apparel Design and Fabrication
nstrumentation Engineering eile
Textile Designing
Apparel Design and Fashion
nstrumentation Technology Textile Designing Printing
Technology
Apparel Manufacture and Design . . .
Weston rgieing Appevel Tenney) Teale Enginecting
Mechanical Engineering (Industry Computer Aided Costume Design Textile Manufactures
Integrated) and Dress Making Costumer
Mechanical Engineering Design and Dress Making Texile Memuieeiuring ancl
Technology
Mechanical Engineering Textile Marketing and
Handloom and Textile Technology
(Maintenance) Management
Mechanical Engineering Textile Technology (Man Made Textile P .
(Refrigeration and Air Fibre Technology) extile Frocessing
Conditioning)
Dress Designing and Garment
Manufacturing Textile Processing Technology
Mechanical Engineering Power
Plant Engineering
Mechanical Engineering Tube Well Fashion and Clothing Technology Textile Technology
Engineering
Textile Technology (Textile Design
Fashion and Design ema Weewitne)
Mechanical Engineering (Repair
and Maintenance)
- . Fashion and Apparel Design tea e Technology (Manmade
Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Fibre)
Mechanical and Electrical CBW (Costume Desiem ond
Dress Making)
Fashion Designing
Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Fashion Designing and Garment
wisn Sits
Fashion Technology
Metallurgical Engineering Garment Technology
Garment and Fashion Technology
Metallurgy
Metallurgy and Material Garment Design and Fashion
Technology Technology
[Mining Engineering | Garment Fabrication
Mine Engineering Garment Manufacturing
Technology
Mine Surveying
Handl d Textile Technol
Mining and Mine Surveying eee Ne SHE tee oe
Drilling Engineering Knitting and Garment Technology
140
--- Page 157 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-12
Closest available Nomenclature of Under Graduate Degrees for the Diploma in Engineering and Technology
(Conversion of Levels)
[RRNASHSREUHESTERSIRCSHASNNN | 4 | Chemical Engineering (Ferilizer
1. | Aero Space Engineering 5. | Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)
2. | Aeronautical Engineering 6. | Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)
3. | Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Avionics) 7. | Chemical Engineering (Petrochemical)
4. | Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Helicopter| | 8. | Plastic and Mould Technology
and Power Plants) 9. | Plastic and Polymer Engineering
__| Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 10. | Chemical Engineering Specialization in
1. | Smart Agritech 11. | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)
2. | Agricultural Engineering 12. | Petrochemical Engineering
3. | Agricultural Technology 13. | Chemical Engineering (Sugar Technology)
4. | Agriculture Engineering 14. | Surface Coating Technology
15. | Chemical Technology
Fisheries Technology 16. | Textile Chemistry
17. | Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)
1. | Architectural Assistantship 18. | Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic
2. | Interior Decoration Technology)
Interior Design 19. | Chemical Technology Fertilizer
20. | Glass and Ceramics Engineering
1. | Automobile Engineering 21. | Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)
2. | Automobile Engineering (Automobile Fitter) 22. | Surface Coating Technology
3. | Automotive Engineering 23. | Technical Chemistry
4. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile) 24. | Smart and Sustainable Transportation
5. | Mechanical Engineering Automobile
1. | Biomedical Electronics 2. _| Civil and Rural Engineering
2. | Ophthalmic Technology 3. | Civil (Public Health and Environment)
Enai ¢
3. | Opto-Electronics Engineering Hee)
_ 4. | Mine Surveying
4. | Technician X-Ray Technology aa ; t
: 5 : , 5. | Mining and Mine Surveying
5. | Biomedical Engineering = 3
F 5 ‘ 6. | Geoinformatics
6. | Biomedical Instrumentation
Ran oe
8. | Civil Engi i
1. | Biotechnology Mt ogres ;
|i Mceramictensinecrna nn) — een ene ees
: 10. | Survey Engineering
1. | Ceramics 1. civil Enai ing (Building Servi
2. | Ceramic Engineering and Technology ‘ Engineering) yeti ae) a
3. | Ceramic Technology 12. | Transportation Engineering and Management
4, || Ceramics\Engineering 13. | Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)
5._| Glass and Ceramics Engineering 14. | Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution
chemicsiensineerins | contro)
1 Cement Technology 15. | Civil Engineering (Environmental and Pollution
Chemical Engineering Control)
Water Technology and Health Science 16. | Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)
141
--- Page 158 ---
Approval Process Handbook
17. | Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering) 27. | Virtual and Augmented Reality
18. | Civil Engineering (Rural Engineering) 28. | Information and Communication Technology
19. | Civil Engineering (Water Resource and 29. | Information Engineering
Management) 30. | Information Science
20. | Civil Environmental Engineering 31. | Information Science and Engineering
21. | Civil Technology 32. | Information Science and Technology
22. | Civil Engineering (Construction) 33. | Information Security Management
23. | Civil (SFS Mode) 34. | Information Technology
24. | Construction Engineering 35. | Information Technology and Engineering
25. | Construction Technology 36. | Information Technology Enabled Services and
26. | Construction Technology and Management Management
27. | Geoinformatics and Surveying Technology 37. | Multimedia Technology
28. | Quantity Surveying and Construction 38. | Network Engineering
Management 39. | Web Designing
29. | Survey Engineering AO. | Web Technologies
30. | Water Resource Management 41. | Advanced Communication and Information
31. | Geographic Information System and Global System
Positioning System Electronics and Computer Engineering
32. | Transportation Engineering
33. | Water Technology and Health Science 1. | Dairy Engineering
1. | Artificial Intelligence (Al) and Machine Learning 1. | Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
2. | Commercial and Computer Practice 2. | Electrical and Electronics Engineering
3. vate Wide Network Design and 3. | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
ainvenance ; 4. | Electrical and Mechanical Engineering
4. | Computer Hardware and Networking F : :
= ; 5. | Electrical and Power Engineering
5. | Computer and Information Science :
r C an Noe 6. | Electrical Energy Systems
: ene eeTee rons 7. | Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and
7. | Computer Engineering Control)
8._| Computer Engineering and Application 8. | Electrical and instrumentation Engineering
9. | Computer Engineering and loT 9. | Electrical Engineering
10. | Computer Hardware and Maintenance 10. | Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical
11. | Computer Hardware and Networking and Electrical
12. | Computer Networking 11. | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)
13. | Computer Science and Engineering 12. | Electrical Engineering and Electric Vehicle
14. | Computer Science Technology
15. | Computer Science and Technology 13. | Electrical Engineering industrial Control
16. | Computer Science and Information Technology 14. | Electrical Engineering (Industrial Control)
17. | Computer Science and Systems Engineering 15. | Electrical Machines
18. | Computer Software Technology 16. | Electrical Power System
17. | Electrical Power Systems
19. | Computer Technology
20. | Computer Technology and Applications 18. | Power Electronics
19. | Power Systems Engineering
21. | Cloud Computing and Big Data
22. | Electronics and Computer Engineering 20. | Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Advanced Communication and Information
23. | Cyber Forensics and Information Security oN.
System
24. | Gaming and Animation
Advanced Electronics and Communication
25. | Office Management and Computer Application 22. | Engineering
26. | I.T. (Courseware Engineering)
142
--- Page 159 ---
Approval Process Handbook
| Electronics and Communication Engineering | AO. | Integrated Circuit (IC) and Design Fabrication*
1. | Applied Videography 41. | IC Manufacturing
2. | Applied Electronics 42. | Electronics Engineering (Industry Integrated)
3. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation 43. | Electronics Engineering (Micro Electronics)
Engineering 44. | Micro Electronics
4._| Audiography and Sound Engineering 45. | Electronics Engineering (Specialization in
5. | Bio Electronics Consumer Electronics)
6. | Communication and Computer Networking 46. | Electronics Engineering (Modern Consumer
7. | Combat Radio and Communication Technology Electronics)
8. | Digital Communications 47. | Electronics Engineering With Microprocessor
9. | Digital Electronics 48. | Electronics Instrumentation and Control
7 i. F F Engineering
0. | Telecommunication Engineering = = =
7 ar 49. | Electronics Production and Maintenance
1. | Telecommunication Technology = =
7 _ > : 50. | Electronics Robotics
2. | Digital Electronics and Microprocessor =
7 an 7 Te 51. | Electronics Technology
3. | Digital Electronics and Communication = —
Engineering 52. | Electronics Tele Communication
14. | Digital Systems 53. | Embedded Systems
15. | Electronic Engineering 54. | Industrial Electronics
16. | Electronic Instrumentation and Control 55. | Micro Electronics
Engineering 56. | Opto-Electronics Engineering
17. | Electronic Science and Engineering 57. | Power Electronics
18. | Electronics 58. | Telecommunication Engineering
19. | Electronics and Avionics 59. | Telecommunication Technology
20. | Electronics and Communication Engineering 60. | TV and Sound Engineering
21. | Electronics and Communication Engineering 61. | Information and Communication Technology
(Industry Integrated) 62. | Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
22. | Electronics and Communication Technology 63. | Electrical and Electronics Engineering
23. | Electronics Communication and 64. | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)
renee |___ Environmental Engineering |
24. | Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering
95. | Electroni Product 1. | Environmental Engineering
. | Electronics and Production F
= —, ——= 2. | Water Technology and Health Science
26. | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering 7H . 5 . :
; a. 4 ; 3. | Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution
27. | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering Control)
(Technology electronic Radio)
= ; ; = 4. | Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)
28. | Electronics and Video Engineering rari Z " v
; , ; 5. _| Civil Environmental Engineering
oe |_______Energy Engineering |
30. | Electronics (Fiber Optics) ri
: 7 . _| Renewable Energy
31. | Electronics (Robotics) ;
= — —= 2. | Alternate Energy Technologies *
32. | Electronics and Communication Engineering | Fashion Technology =|
(Microwaves) : s
3am lclecronistond! Gomputenenanecnne . | Jewellery Design and Manufacture Technology
34. | Electronics and Electrical Engineering ___Fire and Safety Engineering
35. | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering Fire Technology and Safety
(Radio and System) Film Engineering and Technology
36. | Electronics Communication and 1. | Cinematography
Instrumentation Engineering 2. | Direction Screen Play Writing and TV
37. | Electronics Engineering Production
38. | Electronics Engineering (Digital Electronics) 3. | Film Technology and TV Production (Digital
39. | Electronics Engineering Modern Consumer Intermediate)
Electronics 4. | Film and Video Editing
143
--- Page 160 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Dairy Engineering
Food Processing and Preservation
Sugar Technology
5. | Photography 6. | Leather Technology Footwear Computer Aided
6. | Film Technology and TV Production Shoe Design
(Cinematography) 7. | Leather Technology Tanning
7. | Electronics and Video Engineering Saddlery Technology and Export Management
Library and information Science
Marine Engineering and Systems.
HAR ely)
Food Processing Technology 2. | Marine Engineering
Food Technology 3. | Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical
Smart Agritech and Electrical
4. | Marine Engineering and Systems (Artificer
Training)
144
1. | Automation and Robotics rm c isa
2. | Control and Instrumentation arine Engineering and Systems
3. | Construction Automation Pee ee
F ‘ 7 1. | Finance Account and Auditing
4. | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
F — 2. | Travel and Tourism
5. | Electronics Communication and -
Instrumentation Engineering 3.__| Material Management
6. | Instrument Technology 4._| Logistics Technology
7. [linscumenieton |____Mechanical Engineering
8. | Instrumentation and Control Engineering 1. | CAD CAM
9. | Instrumentation (E&C) 2. _| Design and Drafting
10. | Instrumentation Engineering 3._| Foundry Technology
11. | Instrumentation Technology 4.__| Heat Power Engineering
12. | Instruments and Medical Equipment 5._| Machine Engineering
13. | Electronics Instrument and Control 6. Mechanica (anata Aided Design,
14. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation ane oc re eine) neater)
Engineering 7. | Mechanical CAD/CAM
15. | Electronic Instrumentation and Control 8._| Mechanical Engineering(Industry Integrated)
Engineering 9. | Mechanical Engineering
16. | Opto-Electronics Engineering 10. | Mechanical Engineering (Auto)
17. | Robotic Process Automation 11. | Mechanical Engineering (Maintenance)
18. | Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering 12. | Mechanical Engineering (Refrigeration and Air
19. | Instrumentation and Process Control Conditioning)
20. | Electronics Robotics 13. | Mechanical Engineering, Refrigeration and Air
Conditioni
21. | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering eu! eng } - -
' : F 14. | Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die)
22. | Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and = = 7
Control) 15. | Tool and Die Engineering
23. | ECG Technology 16. | Mechanical Engineering Automobile
24. | Automation Engineering 17. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
D5 ielecthonicarComuunicationtand 18. | Mechanical Engineering Power Plant
Instrumentation Engineering Engineering
1. | Footwear Technology 20. | Mechanical Engineering (Production)
2. | Leather and Fashion Technology 21. | Mechanical Engineering Specialization in CAD
3. | Leather Goods and Footwear Tech 22. | Mechanical Engineering (CAD)
4 eueetqe Nach 23. | Precision Manufacturing
1 | eames Tecine pay. 24. | Robotics and Mechatronics
5. | Leather Technology (Footwear) 25. | Robotic Process Automation
--- Page 161 ---
Approval Process Handbook
26. | Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering
27. | Tool and Die Making
28. | Mechanical Engineering Tube Well Engineering
29. | Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM)
30. | Mechanical Engineering Computer Aided
Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing
Mining and Mine Surveying
Shipbuilding Engineering
Drilling Engineering
SYS l]e|s
Drilling Technology
a
Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)
31. | Mechanical Engineering (Foundry) 2. | Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)
32. | Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool
Maintenance and Repairs)
Packaging Technology
33. | Mechanical Engineering (Repair and
Maintenance)
34. | Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal
Engineering
35. | Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal
36. | Tool Die and Mould Making
37. | Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical
and Electrical
2. | Printing and Packing Technology
Petrochemical Engineering
Petrochemical Refinery
Petrochemical Technology
Petroleum Engineering
Petroleum Technology
| Ca]ls= G9] >
38. | Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)
39. | Machine Tools and Maintenance Engineering
40. | Machine Tools Technology 1. | Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
41. | Industrial Engineering and Management
pS
Beauty Culture and Cosmetology
42. | Maintenance Engineering
gs
Cosmetology and Health
43. | Material Management
44. | Energy Systems Engineering 1. | Plastic and Mould Technology
1 Mechatronics 3. | Plastic Engineering
2. | Fabrication Technology 4. | Plastics Mould Technology
Fabrication Technology and Erection 5. | Plastic Mould Technology
Engineering = 6. | Plastics Technology
4. | Robotics and Mechatronics 7 Pests echncllegyy
|___Metallurgical Engineering 8. | Plastics Engineering
; wero Engineering 9. | Plastics Processing and Testing
: etallurgy 10. | Polymer Engineering and Technology
3. | Metallurgy and Material Technology 11. | Polymer Technology
EERE 1 plastic Process and Testing
Artificer Training (Electronics)
a5
CO Jah
Post Plastic Process and Testing
Artificer Training (Electrical)
=
nied
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)
Artificer Training (Mechanical)
Shall qrimsesaiyesring 1. | Printing and Packing Technology
Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter) a, LeaAtibg Technology
Combat Armament and Weapon Technology
Combet: Dagiigcand Meigtenhre/genncleay Electronics Production and Maintenance
sapens Ehelneenng Industrial and Production Engineering
vo [N[ofolaje|y]=
|
N | oO ]alaAlwlrn}a
Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical
and Electrical Industrial Production Engineering
IC Manufacturing
Machine Tools and Maintenance Engineering
Mine Engineering
Machine Tools Technology
NO
Mining Engineering
Mine Surveying Manufacturing Engineering
1
oS
5
--- Page 162 ---
Approval Process Handbook
8. | Manufacturing Technology 7. | Computer Aided Costume Design and Dress
9. | Precision Manufacturing Making
10. | Production and Industrial Engineering 8._| Costumer Design and Dress Making
11. | Production Engineering 9. | Handloom and Textile Technology
12. | Production Technology 10. | Textile Technology (Man Made Fibre
- _. Technology)
3. | Logistics Technology - —— -
7 7 7 1. | Dress Designing and Garment Manufacturing
4. | Tool and Die Making = ; =
: : 7 2. | Fashion and Clothing Technology
5. | Tool and Die Engineering 13. | Foshi d Desi
16. | Tool and Die Under Mechanical Engineering — os “on ete Sen -
7 ; F 4. | Fashion and Apparel Design
7. | Maintenance Engineering = = —
, 5. | Fashion Designing
8. | Material Management 16. | Fashion Desiani dG aha
19. | Tool Die and Mould Making - 7 chien Technolog Site Stet eee
20. | Fabrication Technology — ceieln Teeny
~ F 8. | Garment Technology
21. | Fabrication Technology and Erection = =
Engineering 9. | Garment and Fashion Technology
22. | CAD CAM 20. | Garment Design and Fashion Technology
23. | Design and Drafting 21. | Garment Fabrication
24. | Digital Manufacturing Technologies 22. | Garment Manufacturing Technology
25. | Jewellery Design and Manufacture Technolog 23. | Handloom and Textile Technology
26. | Foundry Technology 24. | Knitting and Garment Technology
27. | Mechanical (Computer Aided Design, 25. | Knitting Technology
Manufacture and Engineering) 26. | Textile Chemistry
28. | Mechanical CAD/CAM 27. | Textile Design
29. | Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die) 28. | Textile Designing
30. | Mechanical Engineering Production 29. | Textile Designing Printing
31. | Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering 30. | Textile Engineering
32. | Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM) 31. | Textile Manufactures
33. | Mechanical Engineering (Foundry) 32. | Textile Manufacturing Technology
34. | Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool 33. | Textile Manufacturing and Technology
Maintenance and Repairs) 34. | Textile Marketing and Management
35. Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal 35. | Textile Processing
Metin 36. | Textile Processing Technology
; Pulp Ted 37. | Textile Technology
> - Z 7m = - 38. | Textile Technology (Textile Design and Weaving)
A, wt EF = A hdl 39. | Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre )
- eae MI acide 40. | CDDM (Costume Design and Dress Making)
4. | Wood Technology
5. | Wood and Paper Technology TA \Rubbeiechnology
2. | Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic
1. | Shipbuilding Engineering Technology)
3. | Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)
1. | Apparel Design and Fabric
BCA aes d Fabrication Technol 1. | Home Science
: las le Sr 2. | Hotel Management and Catering Technology
3. | Apparel Design and Fashion Technology
4. | Apparel Manufacture and Design 1. | Biomedical Instrumentation
5.__| Apparel Technology 2. | Medical Electronics Engineering
6. | Carpet Technology 3. | Medical Electronics
--- Page 163 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4. | Medical Laboratory Technology - Media & Mass Communication
5. | Instruments and Medical Equipment - Accounts and Audit
- Engineering Education - Administration Services
- Home Science - Computer Application and Business
- Beauty and Hair Dressing Management
. Film and Video Editing - Modern Office Management
. Film Technology and TV Production - Modern Office Management and Secretarial
Film Processing) Practice
- Film Technology and TV Production (Sound -__| Modern Office Practice
Recording and Sound - Commercial Practice
- Engineering) - Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG)
- Film Technology (Animation and Visual Effects) - ECG Technology
- Sound Recording Engineering - Health Care Technology
- Mass Communication - Animation and Multimedia Technology
B. Closest available Nomenclature of Diploma for the Under Graduate Degree in Engineering and
Technology (For conversion of Levels)
on
Biomedical Engineering
Aero Space Engineering 6. Biomedical Instrumentation
Aerospace Engineering
Aeronautical Engineering Biomedical Engineering
Airline Management Biomedical and Robotic Engineering
al |g] 8]-
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering Biomedical Instrumentation
|| P|N|-
Electronics and Biomedical Engineering
Agricultural Engineering
Smart Agritech Biotechnology
Agricultural Technology Bioinformatics
j
|
Agriculture Engineering Biochemical Engineering
Bioelectronics Engineering
Architectural Assistantship Computer Science and Biosciences
NO
Architecture and Interior Decoration Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
G, Architecture Assistantship
Ceramic Engineering and Technology
1. Architectural Assistantship vy Ceramic Technology
De Interior Decoration 3t Ceramics Engineering
Chemical and Electro Chemical Engineering
Ws
Automobile Engineering Chemical Engineering (Desalination and
Automobile Maintenance Engineering Water Treatment)
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Automotive Technology
Fe NS
Mechanical Engineering Automobile Biochemical Engineering
Dyestuff Technology
2D oars Sale OMe) Cure Co)
Biomedical Electronics Petrochem Engineering
Ophthalmic Technology Chemical Engineering
Opto-Electronics Engineering Rubber and Plastics Technology
kes alae
Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)
Technician X-Ray Technology
147
--- Page 164 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1
a»
foe)
10. | Oils, Oleochemicals and Surfactants
Technology
11. | Chemical Technology 1. Computer and Communication Engineering
. | Dye Stuff Technology 2. Computer Engineering
NNN NNSGHacelccatingTecHRCISSYNNNN (2. | Computer Engineering and Application
1. | Surface Coating Technology 4. Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
2. Oil and Paint Technology & Computer Networking
|McHemicallEngineering(OilTechnolesyINN) §[6. | Compuier Science and Engineering
1. Oil Technology 7. 3-D Animation and Graphics
2. Oils, Oleo chemicals and Surfactants 8. Computer Engineering (Software
Technology Engineering)
3. Paint Technology 9. Software Engineerin
g 9
[ Civil Engineering (Construction Technology) | 10. | Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial
1. | Building and Construction Technology Intelligence)
2. Construction Engineering 11. | Robotics and Artificial Intelligence
3. Construction Technology 12. | Computer Science
4. Construction Technology and Management 13. cone Science and Engineering (Data
5. Civil Engineering (Construction Technology) lence) -
_ ; F 14. | Cyber Physical Systems
6. Civil and Infrastructure Engineering ; = =
| Civil and Environmental Engineering __ 15. | Computer Science and Engineering (Internet
of Things and Cyber Security Including Block
1. Civil and Environmental Engineering Chain Technology)*
2. Environment Engineering 16. | Computer Science and Engineering and
G, Environmental Engineering Business Systems
4. Environmental Science and Engineering 17. | Computer Science and Engineering
, (Networks)*
5. | Environmental Science and Technology - =
6. Civil Engineering (Environmental Ie, | Caumpulior Satanga cine) Best
Engineering) 19. | Computer Science and Engineering (Internet
we)
7. Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering) of Things)
| —s«siviliEngineering 20. | Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial
— - = Intelligence and Machine Learning)
1. Civil and Rural Engineering 91. | Industrial loT™
2a Civil Neann@lesy - - 22. | Computer Science and Biosciences
Ss Civil and Water Management Engineering 23. | Computer Science and Business Systems
4. Civil Engineering Environment and Pollution DAW eam puicy scitncear dienaimecringl(Gyber
Cong" - - Security)
&, Civil Engineering with Computer Application Deere puler)scionce bhdulectinalSay
6. ae Reptorngtions.7 26. | Arlifcial Intelligence (Al) and Data Science
; = ities ore Sepices: Blaching 27. | Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
5 ee oor eng 28. | Computer Science and Medical Engineering
: M AUIRES ENS - - 29. | Computer Science and Social Sciences
10,\\1 Crihbhyirenrartal Engineering 30. | Computer Science and Information
11. _| Civil Engineering and Planning Technology
12. | Construction Engineering and Management 31. | Computer Science and Systems Engineering
32. | Computer Technology
b Geospatial Technology and Geoinformatics 33. | Computing in Computing
2. Geo Informatics 34. | Computing in Multimedia
(Sib iAnimationiensierephieT (35. | Computing in Software
2. | Advanced Computer Application 1. | Information and Communication Technology
--- Page 165 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Electronic Engineering
Electronic Science and Engineering
2. Applied Electronics and Communications
3 Telecommunication Engineering
4. Bioelectronics Engineering
5. Electronic Instrumentation and Control
Engineering
2. nformation Engineering 6. Electronics and Communication
3. nformation Science and Engineering (Communication System Engineering)
4. nformation Science and Technology 7. Electronics and Communication Engineering
F (Bio-Medical Engineering)
& nformation Technology = —
F ; 7 8. Electronics and Communication Technology
6. nformation Technology and Engineering
: : 9. Nano Technology
7. | Software Engineering - 7 ; '
[___ DalryEngineering | ne Computes Engines
: oe 11._| Electronics
1. Dairy Engineering = > — > 7
2 Dairy Technol 2. | Electronics and Communication Engineering
- airy “ecano ogy (Industry Integrated)
Engineering (Technologynician — Electronic
1. Electrical and Computer Engineering Radio)
2. Electrical and Electronics (Power System) 14. | Electronics Instrument and Control
a, Electrical and Electronics Engineering 15. | Electronics Engineering (VLSI Design and
4. Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering Technology)
& Electrical Power Engineering 16. _| Nano Science and Technology
6. Electrical, Electronics and Power Engineering 17._ | Electronics and Communication Engineering
7. Electrical Engineering 18. | Electronics and Communication Engineering
8. Electronics and Electrical Engineering inchs Ins meit)
? peeing SH (csi ese [SS See)
Power) - - - -
10. | Electrical Instrumentation and Control 1. Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering
Engineering 2. Electronics and Telecommunication
11. | Electrical, Electronics and Power Electronics and Tele-Communication
|___ Electrical and Power Engineering | sarees
1. Electrical and Mechanical Engineering 4. Seaireniles one! el Seoummniesiiem
- - ; Engineering
2. E ectrical and Power Engineering So Electronics and Telecommunication
oo Electrical Engineering Industrial Control Engineering(Technologynician Electronic
Radio)
6. Electronics Communication and
1. | Advanced Communication and Information Instrumentation Engineering
System 7. | Radio Physics and Electronics
2. | Advanced Electronics and Communication 8. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation
Engineering Engineering
3. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation 9. | Telecommunication Engineering
Engineering 10. | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering
A. Applied Electronics and Communications y ae : F
11. | Electronics and Communication Engineering
5. Communication Engineering (Microwaves)
NID SSNENCCSTICS 12. Electonics and Communication Engineering
1. Digital Techniques for Design and Planning 13. | Electronics and Computer Science
Electronics and Control Systems
Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Electronics and Power Engineering
Electronics and Telematics Engineering
Electronics Design Technology
Electronics Engineering
SEOs OT He 1-00.) NI KS
Electronics Instrumentation and Control
Engineering
149
--- Page 166 ---
Approval Process Handbook
9)
Electronics System Engineering 1. Robotics and Automation
Se}
Electronics Technology
Medical Electronics Engineering
1. Energy and Environmental Management 2. Medical Electronics
2. Energy Engineering . | Medical Lab Technology
3. | Smart and Sustainable Energy
4. Environmental Science and Engineering : Foot Wear Technology
5. Environmental Science and Technology
6. Environmental Engineering Leather Technology
|___Environmental Engineering |
1. Environment Engineering 1. Naval Architecture and Ship Building
2 Energy and Environmental Management Engineering
Shipbuilding Engineering
a
Optics and Optoelectronics
Marine Engineering
2. Marine Technology
1. Power Electronics
2. Power Electronics and Instrumentation | _ Industrial and Production Engineering
Engineering Industrial and Production Engineering
3) Power Electronics Engineering Industrial Engineering
Industrial Engineering and Management
SS) SUR ONS IS
Fire Technology and Safety Mechanical Engineering (Production)
Fire Engineering
Fire and Life Safety
Safety and Fire Engineering
Industrial Production Engineering
Production and Industrial Engineering
||P] |=
Production Engineering
1. Food Engineering and Technology 1. Manufacturing Engineering
2. Food Processing and Preservation 2. Manufacturing Engineering and Automation
3. Food Processing Technology 3. | Manufacturing Engineering and Technology
4. Food Technology 4. Manufacturing Process and Automation
5. Food Technology and Management Engineering
[_Fisherier Technology si os Manufacturing Science and Engineering
1. Fisheries Engineering 6. Manufacturing Technology
[| __ Automation Engineering | 7. | Additive Manufacturing
1. | Automation and Robotics 8. | Automobile Engineering
2 Automation Engineering [____Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical and Automation Engineering
2. Mechanical Engineering (Welding
1. Instrument Technology TechHA
De Instrumentation neat ay) PF
3. Autortutinn aunearing 8). Moranical Engineering AGS Integrated)
A Flattcanictast ‘ati Gaara 4. Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering
: ectronic Instrumentation and Contro (@idditive Monbfacturing)
Engineering 5 eh niddl Gnd Reit’Ens =
5. Instrumentation and Control Engineering : Raa Ta ar a a th F :
¢ Fr echanica ngineering anufacturing
6. | Construction Automation 6. Evainddtiog
7. Electronics Instrument and Control 7. Riccharieelena neering Deeea
8. Instrumentation and Electronics ; = -
: : 3 8. Mechanical Engineering
9: Instrumentation Engineering
10. | Instrumentation Technology 9. Power Engineering
150
--- Page 167 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
Polymer Science and Technolo
(Additive Manufacturing) U SY
Mechanical and Smart Manufacturing
2. Mechanical Engineering Automobile 1. Plastic and Polymer Engineering
Oo Mechanical Engineering (Repair and 2. Plastics Engineering
Maintenance) 3. Plastic Technology
MERI — 4. Plastics Technology
1. | Advanced Mechatronics and industrial 5. Polymer Engineering
automation 6. Polymer Engineering and Technology
2.__| Precision Manufacturing 7. | Polymer Science and Chemical Technology
3. | Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering 8.
9.
Polymer Technology
Robotics and Automation
Pulp Technolo
Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Z ey
Mechatronics
| N|Sle|s
Poultry Technology
Mechatronics Engineering
Apparel and Production Management
Tool Engineering
Fashion and Apparel Technology
Material Science and Technology
N
Fashion and Apparel Engineering
Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
wo
Fashion Technology
Metallurgical Engineering
Metallurgy
Fibres and Textiles Processing Technology
Falls |C9 9]
Metallurgy and Material Technology
Apparel and Production Management
Jute and Fibre Technology
Mine Engineering
Man Made Fibre Technology
2. Mining Engineering
A) Pein >
Man-Made Textile Technology
1. Nuclear Science and Technology
|__ Printing and Packing Technology |] 5
2. Textile Chemist
1. Packaging Technology as F
_. 7 3. Handloom and Textile Technology
2. Printing and Packing Technology = : -
Ta T 5 4. Textile Engineering
Oo Printing, Graphics and Packaging =
— ‘5! Carpet and Textile Technology
4, Printing Technology 5 ;
(Mreisetm engineerin = een
7) Textile Plant Engineerin
1. Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery se = 5 ZI El
Engineering 8. Technical Textiles
Petrochemical Engineering 2. Textile Processing
Petrochemical Technology 10. | Textile Technology
Petroleum Engineering
he EO ES)
Petroleum Technology 1. | Rubber and Plastics Technology
Rubber Technology
|
1. Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical
Technology Pharmaceutical Chemistry and 1. Cement and Ceramic Technology
Technology - Nano Technology and Robotics
2. Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical APlannine
Technology -
ce Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology wEneray,and' EnyirohmentayManagement
4. Pharmaceutical Engineering - Energy Engineering
5. Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
15
--- Page 168 ---
ANNEXURE-13
Major Disciplines, their corresponding Courses and Relevant/
Appropriate Branch of Under Graduate Degree/Diploma in
Engineering and Technology and Vice-Versa
Section A:
Major Disciplines, their corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch of Diploma in
Engineering and Technology.
Approval Process Handbook
1. Aero Space Engineering 2.2. | Chemical Engineering (Oil
2. Aeronautical Engineering Technology)
3. Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Avionics) 2.3. | Chemical Technology (Paint
|______ Agriculture Engineering | eau
, : : 3. Petrochemical Engineering
1. Agricultural Engineering = :
> 3.1. | Petrochemical Refinery
2. Agricultural Technology -
[Architecture |e enews
3.3. | Petrol Engi i
1. Architectural Assistantship SUSE Eng
F F 3.4. | Petroleum Technology
2. Interior Decoration :
; 7 3.5. | Chemical Engineering (Petro
a, Interior Design Chemical)
(MB HESICSY I 5.6 | Plastic and Mould Technology
de Biotechnology 4. Plastic and Polymer Technology
[Ceramic Engineering =| 4.1. | Plastic and Polymer Engineering
1. Ceramic Engineering and Technology 4.2. | Plastic Engineering
2, Ceramic Technology 4.3. | Plastic Mould Technology
a, Ceramics Engineering 4.4. | Plastic Technology
4. Glass and Ceramics Engineering 4.5. | Plastics Processing and Testing
|____Chemical Engineering | 4.6. | Polymer Engineering and Technology
Uo Chemical Engineering 4:7. | Polymer Technology
1.1. | Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer) 4.8. | Plastic Process and Testing
1.2; | Chemical Enginessingy( Qu 4.9. | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)
Technology)
1.3. | Chemical Engineering (Petro wa - 5
Chemical) 1. Civil Engineering
1.4. | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer) 1. | Civil and Rural Engineering
1.5. | Chemical Engineering (Sugar 2. _| Civil (SFS Mode)
Technology) 1.3. | Civil Draftsman
1.6. | Chemical Engineering 1.4. | Civil Engineering
1.7. | Chemical Technology 1.5. | Civil Engineering and Planning
1.8. | Chemical Technology (Paint 16 Civil Engineering (Building Services
Technology) "| Engineering)
1.9. | Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic 1.7. | Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)
Technology) 1.8. | Civil Engineering (Construction)
U1O PChemicablechnology-hertilizer 1.9. | Civil Engineering (Rural Engineering)
1.11. | Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic) Tho. 4 ewiacelnl
1.12. | Surface Coating Technology fae aha Kir sacecae
1.13. | Technical Chemistry 1.11. | Construction Engineering
2 Oil and Paint Technology 1.12. | Construction Technology
1
a
--- Page 169 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1.13. | Construction Technology and
Management
1.14. | Geoinformatics and Surveying
Technology
1.15. | Geographic Information System and Global
Positioning System
1.16. | Quantity Surveying and Construction
Management
1.17. | Survey Engineering
1.18. | Transportation Engineering
Do Environment Engineering
2.1. | Civil and Environmental Engineering
2.2. | Civil (Public Health and Environment)
Engineering
2.3. | Civil Engineering (Environment and
Pollution Control)
2.4. | Civil Engineering (Environmental
Engineering)
2.5. | Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)
2.6. | Civil Environmental Engineering
2.7. | Environmental Engineering
3. Water Resources Engineering
3.1. | Water Resource Management
3.2. | Civil Engineering (Water Resource and
Management)
3.3. | Water Technology and Health Science
ile Computer Science Engineering
1.1. | Advanced Computer Application
1.2. | Campus Wide Network Design and
Maintenance
1.3. | Computer Hardware and Networking
1.4. | Computer Applications
1.5. Computer Engineering
1.6. | Computer Engineering and Application
1.7. | Computer Hardware and Maintenance
1.8. | Computer Hardware and Networking
1.9. | Computer Networking
1.10. | Computer Science and Engineering
1.11. | Computer Science
1.12. | Computer Science and Technology
1.13. | Computer Science and Systems Engineering
1.14. | Computer Software Technology
1.15. | Computer Technology
1.16. | Computer Technology and Applications
1.17. | Cyber Forensics and Information Security
1.18. | Network Engineering
1.19. | Web Designing
1.20. | Web Technologies
1.
1.21. | Electronics and Computer Engineering
2. Information Technology
2.1. | Computer Science and Information
Technology
2.2. | Information and Communication
Technology
2.3. | Information Engineering
2.4. | Information Science
2.5. | Information Science and Engineering
2.6. | Information Science and Technology
2.7. Information Security Management
2.8. | Information Technology
2.9. | Information Technology and Engineering
2.10. | Information Technology Enabled Services
and Management
2.11. | Advanced Communication and Information
System
2.12. | |.T. (Courseware Engineering)
2.13. | Computer and Information Science
Dairy Engineering
Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
Electrical and Mechanical Engineering
Electrical and Power Engineering
Electrical Energy Systems
NYRIAy, RleE_Es
Electrica
Control)
Engineering (Instrumentation and
Electrical Engineering
x0] 9
Electrica
Power)
Engineering (Electronics and
10.
Electrical Engineering (Industrial Control)
11.
Electrical Machines
12.
Electrical Power Systems
13.
Power Systems Engineering
14.
1.
Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Electronics Engineering
41.
Applied Electronics
1.2. | Digital Electronics
1.3. | Digital Electronics and Microprocessor
1.4. | Digital Systems
1.5. | Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
2. Electronics and Communication
Engineering
2.1. | Electrical and Electronics Engineering
153
--- Page 170 ---
Approval Process Handbook
2.2. | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and 2.39. | TV and Sound Engineering
Power) 2.40. | Information and Communication
2.3. | Electronic Engineering Technology
2.4. | Electronic Science and Engineering 3. Instrumentation Engineering
2.5. | Electronics 3.1. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation
2.6. | Electronics and Avionics Engineering
2.7. | Electronics and Production 3.2. | Automation and Robotics
2.8. | Electronics and Video Engineering 3.3. | Automation Engineering
2.9. | Electronics and Computer Engineering 3.4. | Control and Instrumentation
2.10. | Electronics and Electrical Engineering 3.5. __| Biomedical Instrumentation
2.11. | Electronics Engineering 3.6. | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
2.12. | Electronics Engineering (Industry Integrated) 3.7. necrice Engineering (Instrumentation and
t
2.13. | Electronics Engineering (Micro Electronics) one ) =
7 7 7 3.8. Electronic Instrumentation and Control
2.14. | Electronics Engineering (Modern Consumer Enel .
Electronics) eae
a , PIRLU LL A oo Electroni Insti tation Engi i
2.15. | Electronics Engineering (Specialization in 5 * = shoniee me 7 ) eiteln Snes
Consumer Electronics) oll _| ICc rere ([elxenites
2.16. | Electronics Engineering With Microprocessor |_| 3-11. | Electronics Communication and
- F - tt tat i i
2.17. | Electronics Production and Maintenance = ns rumen anon ayes
= 3.12. | Electronics Robotics
2.18. | Electronics Technology aie dustrial Electroni
2.19. | Embedded Systems aL ates = —
. t tt
2.20. | Industrial Electronics 3.15 amen sc wey
n 0 tat
2.21. | Micro Electronics 3.16 asumense xen qc ic
. t tat i i
2.22. | Power Electronics nstrumentation and Control Engineering
— - — nstrumentation
2.23. Poteet and Communication 3.17. | Electronics & Communication Engineering
18. t tation Engi i
2.24. | Electronics (Fiber Optics) ; : ee Fachnclone
. t tati
2.25. | Opto-Electronics Engineering ii ve ical Ele ren sc = ey =
2.26. | Electronics and Communication = “° ca se sas See
Engineering 4.1. | Bio Electronics
2.27. | Electronics and Communication 4.2. | Biomedical Engineering
Engineering (Industry Integrated) 4.3. | Medical Electronics Engineering
2.28. | Electronics and Communication Technology 4.4. | Medical Electronics
2.29. | Advanced Communication and Information 4.5. | Biomedical Instrumentation
2.30. Advanced Electronics and Communication Re Fire Technology and Safety
Engineering
2.31. | Electronics and Telecommunication x : =
Eaee aia) 1. ‘ood Processing and Preservation
2.32. | Electronics and Telecommunication 2: Food Processing Technology
Engineering (Technology electronic Radio) 3. Food Technology
2.33. | Digital Communications
2.34. | Electronics and Communication 1. Footwear Technology
Engineering (Microwaves) 2. Leather and Fashion Technology
235 Electronics and Telecommunication 3. Leather Goods and Footwear Tech
Engineering (Radio and System) 4. Leather Technology
2.36 Electronics Communication and SiH Leather Technology (Footwear)
“~* | Instrumentation Engineering Gl Footwear Technology
2.37. | Telecommunication Engineering 7. Leather and Fashion Technology
2.38. | Telecommunication Technology 8. Leather Goods and Footwear Tech
154
--- Page 171 ---
Approval Process Handbook
9. Leather Technology 2.10. | Machine Tools Technology
10. Leather Technology (Footwear) 2.11. | Manufacturing Engineering
11. Leather Technology Footwear Computer 2.12. | Manufacturing Technology
Aided Shoe Design 2.13. | Material Management
12. Leather Technology Tanning 2.14. | Mechanical (Computer Aided Design,
13. Saddlery Technology and Export Manufacture and Engineering)
Management 2.15. | Mechanical CAD/CAM
2.16. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
1. Marine Engineering and Systems 2.17. | Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die)
2 Marine Engineering Mechanical Engineering Automobile
Marine Engineering and Systems (Artificer 2.18. | Mechanical Engineering Production
Training) 2.19. | Mechanical Engineering Specialization in
4. Marine Engineering and Systems CAD
2.20. | Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering
Uo Automobile Engineering 2.21. | Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM)
1.1. | Automobile Engineering 2.22. | Mechanical Engineering (Foundry)(SW)
1.2. | Automobile Engineering (Automobile Fitter) 2.23. | Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool
1.3. | Automotive Engineering Maintenance and Repairs)
1.4. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile) 2.24. Mechanica Welding and Sheet Metal
1.5. | Mechanical Engineering Automobile Neg =
7 2.25. | Precision Manufacturing
1.6. | Energy Systems Engineering , = > ,
7 7 2.26. | Production and Industrial Engineering
1.7. _| Heat Power Engineering = = =
F F 2.27. | Production Engineering
1.8. | Maintenance Engineering =
poe , 2.28. | Production Technology
1.9. | Mechanical Engineering (Industry > >
Integrated) 2.29. | Tool and Die Making
1. Mechanical Engineering 2.30. | Tool and Die Engineering
1. Mechanical Engineering (Maintenance) 2.31. Tool and Die Under Mechanical
—— 7 Engineering
1. Mechanical Engineering (Refrigeration and = =
Air Conditioning) 2.32. | Tool Die and Mould Making
1. Mechanical Engineering Power Plant 3. Mechatronics
Engineering 3.1. | Mechatronics
1. Mechanical Engineering Tube Well 3.2. | Robotics and Mechatronics
1. Mechanica Engineering (Repair and 1. | Metallurgical Engineering
Maintenance)
= ; = ; 2. | Metallurgy
1. Navy Entry Artificer/Diploma in Mechanical t
and/Elécirical 3. | Metallurgy and Material Technology
1. Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
2. Production Engineering 1. | Artificer Training (Electronics)
21 CAD CAM 2. | Artificer Training (Electrical)
22 Desianranm Drang 3. | Artificer Training (Mechanical)
2.3. _| Fabrication Technology 4. | Armament Engineering (GunFitter)
2.4. | Fabrication Technology and Erection 5.__| Weapons Engineering
Engineering 6 Navy Entry Artificer/Diploma in Mechanical
2.5. | Foundry Technology and Electrical
2.6. | Industrial and Production Engineering ___Mining Engineering
2.7. | Industrial Engineering and Management 1. | Mine Engineering
2.8. | Machine Engineering Mine Surveying
2.9. Machine Tools and Maintenance 32. | Mining and Mine Surveying
Engineering
155
--- Page 172 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4. Shipbuilding Engineering 29. Textile Manufacturing and Technology
5. Drilling Engineering 30. Textile Marketing and Management
Drilling Technology Sill. Textile Processing
32. Textile Processing Technology
Packaging Technology 33. Textile Technology
Printing and Packing Technology 34. Textile Technology (Textile Design and
Weaving)
Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology 35. __| Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre)
36. CDDM (Costume Design and Dress
Maki
Printing Technolo:
& ay 1. Biomedical Engineering
2. ECG Technology
Pulp Technology
&, Health Care Technology
Wood and Paper Technology - =
4. Instruments and Medical Equipment
5. Medical Laboratory Technol
1. Apparel Design and Fabric eace e Seven Sere
: ~. 6. Ophthalmic Technology
2. Apparel Design and Fabrication Technology 7 a
3. Apparel Design and Fashion Technology - SEAITSTEIN SCY WesninreXelsy/
4. Apparel Manufacture and Design Apparel
Technology ements 1. 3-D Animation and Graphics
5. Computer Aided Costume Design and 2. Animation and Multimedia Technology
Dress Making Costumer Design and Dress a, Multimedia Technology
Making
6. Handloom and Textile Technology 1. Agcounts cma Auch
7 Textile Technology (Man Made Fibre 2. Ghitnieneiion Santess
Technol F
eenne oy) - &, Computer Application and Business
8. Dress Designing and Garment Management
Manufacturi
5 oh; oc Tl a 4. Finance Account and Auditing
6 ochion od 5 on Wg) WesSnreTeey/ 5. Modern Office Management
- os wn elite PeSiein - 6. Modern Office Management and
11. Fashion and Apparel Design Seeretarial Practice
12. Fashion Designing 7. Modern Office Practice
13. Foshion Designing and Garment 8. Commercial and Computer Practice
7 a 7a aL cl 9. Commercial Practice
: Sn say 10. Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG)
15. Garment Technology
- —_ one ren eee . 1. Rubber Technology
: panes 199 on wSUOW “Set eeoay 2. Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic
18. Garment Fabrication Technology)
19. Garment Manufacturing Technology 3. Chemical Technology (Rubber/Plastic)
20. Handloom and Textile Technology
21. Knitting and Garment Technology " Beauty and Hair Dressing
22. Knitting Technology 2. Beauty Culture and Cosmetology
23. | Textile Chemistry 32 Cosmetology and Health
20% Textile Designing 1. Aaplicd videoaraahy
26. Textile Designing Printing ; ; ,
27. TextlerEnoinceliog 2. Audiography and Sound Engineering
28. Textile Manufactures 3. Cinematography
156
--- Page 173 ---
Approval Process Handbook
4. Direction Screen Play Writing and TV [ss Cement Technology =i
Production 1. Cement Technology
6. Film Editing and TV Production 1. Engineering Education
7. Film Technology and TV Production [| __—_—s‘ Fisheries Technology ss
(Cinematography)
1. Fisheries Technology
8. Film Technology and TV Production (Film
Processing)
- : 1. Home Science
9. Film Technology and TV Production (Sound
Recording and Sound Engineering) a
10. Film Technology (Animation and Visual 1. Jewellery Design and Manufacture
Effects)
Technology
11. Photography
12. Sound Recording Engineering
1. Library and Information Science
1 Hotel Management and Catering Us Sugar Technology
"| Technology | ___Traveland Tourism |
[Mass Communication | ____ Weed Technology |
1. Wood Technology
15
N
--- Page 174 ---
Section B:
Degree in Engineering and Technology.
Approval Process Handbook
Major Disciplines, their corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch of Under Graduate
1. Aero Space Engineering 1. Cement and Ceramic Technology
2. Aerospace Engineering 2. Ceramic Engineering and Technology
&, Airline Management &, Ceramic Technology
4. Aeronautical Engineering 4. Ceramics Engineering
Uo Civil Engineering
1. Agricultural Engineering 1.1. | Building and Construction Technology
2. Smart Agritech 1.2. | Civil and Rural Engineering
a, Agricultural Technology 1.3. | Civil Engineering
4. Agriculture Engineering 1.4. | Civil Engineering with Computer
Application
1. Architecture 1.5. | Civil Engineering and Planning
1.1. | Architectural Assistantship 1.6._| Structural Engineering
1.2. | Architectural Engineering 1.7. | Civil Environmental Engineering
1.3. | Architecture and Interior Decoration 1.8. cM Sates (Construction
1.4. | Architecture Assistantship ae nology) ; ,
; 1.9. | Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
1.5. | Architecture 1.10. | Civil Technol
1.6. | Architecture (Interior Design) ae eee ne ey -
a : : F 1.11. | Construction Automation
1.7. | Building Engineering and Construction = = =
Management 1.12. | Construction Engineering
1.8. | Interior Design 1.13. | Construction Engineering and
Management
2. Planning ,
, F 1.14. | Construction Technology
2.1. | Environmental Planning =
29. | inf Planni 1.15. | Construction Technology and
olbo ntrastructure Planning Management
2.3.__| Planning 1.16. | Geospatial Technology and
2.4. | Urban and Regional Planning Geoinformatics
2.5. | Urban Design 1.17. | Geo Informatics
2.6. | Urban Planning 2. Environment Engineering
2.7. | Urban Regeneration 2.1. | Civil and Environmental Engineering
2.8. | Urban Transport Planning and 2.2. | Civil Engineering (Environmental
Management Engineering)
[RRSEERSICS | 2.3. | Civil Engineering Environment and
a Biotechnology Pollution Control
2. Bioelectronics Engineering 2.4. | Environment Engineering
3) Bioinformatics 2.5. | Environmental Engineering
4. Biochemical Engineering 2.6. | Energy and Environmental Management
5. Computer Science and Biosciences 2.7. | Environmental Science and Engineering
6. Biotechnology and Biochemical 2.8. | Environmental Science and Technology
Engineering 2.9. | Civil Engineering (Environmental
7. Industrial Biotechnology Engineering)
1. Biomedical instrumentation Engineering) -
2! Electronics and Biomedical Engineering 22 Ein argensaaying
3. Biomedical Engineering 3. Water Resources
4. Biomedical and Robotic Engineering 3.1 | Civil and Water Management Engineering
158
--- Page 175 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1.33. | Computing in Multimedia
1. Computer Science and Engineering 1.34. | Computing in Software
1.1. | 3-D Animation and Graphics 1.35. | Electrical and Computer Engineering
1.2. | Advanced Computer Application 1.36. | Electronics and Computer Science
1.3. | Artificial Intelligence (Al) and Data Science 1.37. | Electronics and Computer Engineering
1.4. | Artificial Intelligence and Machine 1.38. | Mathematics and Computing
Learning 1.39. | Software Engineering
1.5. pala and Communication 2. Information Technology
- pSInESIS) - - 2.1. | Information and Communication
6. Computer Science and Applied Technology
Mathematics F F :
7 C opal = 2.2. | Information Engineering
- Fy Conny or Ecmcsing =a 2.3. | Information Science and Engineering
Engineering) Eautale 2.4. | Information Science and Technology
1.9. | Computer Engineering and Application 2.5.__| In ormation Technology : :
1.10, | Gompauier Sconce ond Hesdinecs 2.6. | Information Technology and Engineering
1.11. | Computer Science and Design : - - >
1.12. | Computer Networking Chemical ENgIneenng -
1.13. | Computer Science and Engineering alls Chemical and Electro Chemical
= = = = Engineering
.14. | Computer Science and Social Sciences ; ; : 7
- - .2. | Biochemical Engineering
.15. | Cyber Physical Systems ; : F
- = .3. | Chemical Engineering
-16. | Computer Science 7 7 7 ‘
- - - 4. | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and
.17. | Computer Science and Business Systems Polymer)
-18. | Computer Science and Engineering 1.5. | Chemical Engineering (Desalination and
noes i Tsp cine Seo pee) Water Treatment)
= ae oe Chain Tec ne cay) 1.6. | Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
-19. | Computer Science and Medical :
EEanglinconttare .7. | Chemical Technology
1.20. | Computer Science and Technology = coo [ietrochemlEng needing
1.21. | Robotics and Artificial Intelligence -9._| Dye Stuff Technology
1.22. | Computer Science and Engineering 10. | Rubber Technology
Internet of Things) 1.11. | Rubber and Plastics Technology
1.23. | Computer Science and Engineering and 1.12. | Dyestuff Technology
Business Systems 1.13. | Surface Coating Technology
1.24. Computer Science and Information 2. Oil and Paint Technology
echislogy r 2.1. | Oil and Paint Technology
1.25. | Computer Science and Engineering ;
(Artificial Intelligence and Machine 2 Qi Wgchniglegy -
Learning) 2.3. | Oils, Oleo Chemicals and Surfactants
1.26. | Computer Science and Engineering Technology
Cyber Security) 2.4. | Paint Technology
1.27. | Computer Science and Systems 3. Petrochemical Engineering
Engineering 3.1. | Petrochemical and Petroleum Refinery
1.28. | Computer Science and Engineering Engineering
(Networks) 3.2. | Petrochemical Engineering
1.29. | Computer Science and Engineering (Data 3.3. | Petrochemical Technology
Science) 3.4. | Petroleum Engineering
1.30. opm pure Seine and Engineering 3.5. | Petroleum Technology
(Artificial Intelligence)
1.31. | Computer Technology 1. Doimseaninechiea
1.32. | Computing in Computing 2é Dairy Technology
159
--- Page 176 ---
Approval Process Handbook
1. Electrical and Computer Engineering 1.22. | Radio Physics and Electronics
2. Electrical and Electronics (Power System) 2. Electronics and Communication
3. Electrical and Electronics Engineering Engineering
4. Electrical Power Engineering 2.1. Advanced Communication and
F : : F Information System
& Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering 7 —
6 Electrical, Electroni dP 2.2. | Advanced Electronics and Communication
. ectrical, Electronics and Power Faglineentng
Engineering 7 7 —
F ; ; F 2.3. | Applied Electronics and Communications
7. Electrical and Mechanical Engineering ; = = ; =
7 7 7 2.4. | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering
8. Electrical and Power Engineering - - - -
F F F 2.5. | Biomedical Engineering
9. Electrical Engineering ; —
10 Electrical Enai ina (EI : d 2.6. | Electronics and Communication
, P, Saar ngineering (Electronics|an Engineering (Bio- Medical Engineering)
ower)
nN Electrical Eni ing Industrial C 2.7. | Electronics and Communication
° ectrical Engineering Industrial Contro (Communication System Engineering)
12. E ectrical Instrumentation and Control 2.8. | Communication Engineering
Engineering ar
3 Electrical, El F dP 2.9. | Electronics and Communication
° ectrical, Electronics and Power Technology
14. Electronics and Computer Science 2.10. | Electronics and Communication
15. Electronics and Electrical Engineering Engineering
16. Electronics and Power Engineering 2.11. | Electronics and Communication
Engineering (Industry Integrated)
Energy and Environmental Management 2.12.) E ectronics and Tele-Communication
2. Smart and Sustainable Energy Engineering —
3 Energy Engineerin 2.13. | Electronics and Telecommunication
- oy ng 9 Engineering (Technologynician Electronic
Radio)
1. Electronics Engineering 2.14. | Electronics and Telecommunications
1.1. | Biomedical Engineering Engineering
1.2. | Digital Techniques for Design and 2.15. | Electronics and Telecommunication
Planning 2.16. | Electronics and Telecommunication
1.3. | Electrical and Electronics Engineering Engineering
1.4. | Electrical, Electronics and Power 2.17. | Electronics and Telecommunication
1.5. | Electronic Engineering epie (Technologynician Electronic
‘adio
1.6. | Electronic Sci id Engi i
ec a0 sree ene nines 2.18. | Electronics and Communication
1.7. | Electronics Engineering (Microwaves)
1.8. | Electronics and Computer Science 2.19. | Electronics Communication and
1.9. | Electronics and Computer Engineering Instrumentation Engineering
1.10. | Electronics and Control Systems 2.20. | Electronics and Telematics Engineering
1.11. | Electronics and Electrical Engineering 2.21. | Telecommunication Engineering
1.12. | Electronics and Power Engineering 3; Instrumentation Engineering
1.13. | Electronics Engineering (VLSI Design and 3.1. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation
Technology) Engineering
1.14. | Electronics Design Technology 3.2. | Automation and Robotics
1.15. | Electronics Instrument and Control 3.3. | Automation Engineering
1.16. | Electronics Engineering 3.4. | Biomedical Instrumentation
1.17. | Electronics System Engineering 3.5. | Electrical Engineering Industrial Control
1.18. | Electronics Technology 3.6. | Electrical Instrumentation and Control
= : Engineering
Ay. Siptics and Optpelegy Snics 3.7. | Electronic Instrumentation and Control
1.20. | Power Electronics Engineering
160
--- Page 177 ---
Approval Process Handbook
3.8. | Electronics and Instrumentation 1.11. | Mechanical and Rail Engineering
Engineering 1.12. | Mechanical Engineering (Repair and
3.9. | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Maintenance)
Engineering 1.13. | Power Engineering
3.10. | Electronics and Instrumentation 2. Production Engineering
Engineering
2.1. | Industrial and Production Engineering
3.11. | Electronics Instrumentation and Control
Enefincentine 2.2. | Machine Engineering
3.12. | Power Electronics and Instrumentation 2.3. | Manufacturing Engineering
Engineering 2.4. | COST Engineering and
Uutomation
3.13. | Electronics and Control Systems
2.5. | Manufacturing Engineering and
3.14. | Electronics Communication and
Technology
Instrumentation Engineering
3.15. | Electronics Instrumentation and Control 2.6._| Manufacturing Process and Automation
Engineering 2.7. | Engineering
3.16. | Instrument Technology 2.8. | Industrial Production Engineering
3.17. | Instrumentation 2.9. | Manufacturing Science and Engineering
3.18. | Instrumentation and Control Engineering 2.10. | Manufacturing Technology
3.19. | Instrumentation and Electronics 2.11. | Mechanical Engineering (Production)
3.20. | Instrumentation Engineering 2.12. | Precision Manufacturing
3.21. | Instrumentation Technology 2.13. | Production and Industrial Engineering
3.22. | Power Electronics and Instrumentation 2.14. | Production Engineering
Engineering 2.15. | Tool Engineering
3.23. | Robotics and Automation 3. Automobile Engineering
4. Mechatronics Engineering 3.1. | Automobile Engineering
4.1. | Advanced Mechatronics and Industrial 3.2. | Automobile Maintenance Engineering
4.2. | Automation 3.3. | Automotive Technology
4.3. | Mechatronics 3.4. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
4.4. | Mechatronics Engineering 3.5. | Mechanical Engineering Automobile
5. Medical Electronics 3.6. | Industrial Engineering
5.1. | Medical Electronics Engineering 3.7. | Industrial and Production Engineering
5.2. _| Medical Electronics 3.8. | Industrial Production Engineering
5.3. | Medical Lab Technology 3.9. | Industrial Engineering
5.4. | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering 3.10. | Industrial loT
[| _ Mechanical Engineering | 3.11. | Industrial Engineering and Management
1. Mechanical Engineering 4. Industrial Engineering
1.1. | Electrical and Mechanical Engineering 4.1. | Industrial and Production Engineering
1,2. | Mechanical Engineering (Industr 4.2. | Industrial Production Engineering
Integrated) 4.3. | Industrial Engineering
1.3. | Additive Manufacturing
1.4. | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
4.4. | Industrial loT
- - 4.5. | Industrial Engineering and Management
.5. | Mechanical Engineering (Welding 5
Technology)
Mechatronics Engineering
1.6. | Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering Pak ca hee panicg! Ghd. Ariomafion Eqgingenng
1.7. | (Additive Manufacturing)
1.8. | Mechanical Engineering (Manufacturing
Engineering)
1.9. | Mechanical Engineering 5.4. | Mechanical and Smart Manufacturing
5.2. | Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering
(Additive Manufacturing)
5.3. | Robotics and Artificial Intelligence
1.10. | Mechanical Engineering Design 5.5. | Mechatronics
161
--- Page 178 ---
Approval Process Handbook
on
an
Mechatronics Engineering Nuclear Science and Technology
1. Fire Technology and Safety Packaging Technology
2. Fire Engineering Printing and Packing Technology
3.__[ Fire and Life Safely Pharmac ainwing
4. Safety and Fire Engineering Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical
1 Fisheries Engineering 2. Pharmaceutical Engineering
Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
Food Engineering and Technology a
Poultry Technology
Food Processing Technology ining snginsing
Food Technology Printing and Packing Technology
Food Processing and Preservation
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
2. Printing, Graphics and Packaging
Food Technology and Management
Printing Technology
Foot Wear Technology a
Zz Footwear Technology Pulp Technology
3. [Leather Technology 2
1. Naval Architecture and Ship Building 1.1. | Fibres and Textiles Processing Technology
Engineering 1.2. | Jute and Fibre Technology
2. Shipbuilding Engineering 1.3. | Man Made Fibre Technology
G, Marine Engineering 1.4. | Carpet and Textile Technology
4. Marine Technology 1.5. | Man-Made Textile Technology
(NINIMEHETIGEYERSINCSHANNNN [1.6 | sik Technology
1. Material Science and Technology 1.7. | Technical Textiles
2. Metallurgical and Materials Engineering 1.8. | Handloom and Textile Technology
3. Metallurgical Engineering 1.9. | Facilities and Services Planning
4. Metallurgy 1.10. | Textile Engineering
&, Metallurgy and Material Technology 1.11. | Textile Plant Engineering
[___Military Engineering | 1.12. | Textile Processing
1. Military Engineering 1.13. | Textile Technology
nN
Fashion Technology
1. Mine Engineering 2.1. | Fashion Technology
2. Mining Engineering 2.2. | Facilities and Services Planning
[| ____—NanoTechnology sid 2.3. | Apparel and Production Management
le Nano Science and Technology 2.4. | Fashion and Apparel Technology
“dn Nano Technology 2.5. | Fashion and Apparel Engineering
3} Nano Technology and Robotics Bt Textile Chemistry
w
a
Textile Chemistry
1
lon
NO
--- Page 179 ---
ANNEXURE-14
State Wise Competent Authorities to issue Certificates with
Respect to the Land/ Building
Central Region
Urban and
Urban and
Urban-Municipal
Town and Country
Country Planning
Chhattisgarh Rural-Town and Rural- Town and Cogeco Planning, Municipal
Country Planning Country Planning sel el Cine Corporation
Country Planning
Urban-Urban Urban-Urban Nagar Palika Town
Development Develooment Planner, Nagar
Authority/ Municipal | Urban-Town Planner; evelopme Panchayat
. . Authority/ Town .
Gujrat Corporation; Rural Rural Taluka Commissioner of
> Planner; Rural —Town ran
Town Planner and Development Officer Municipal
. Planner/Taluka .
Valuation Development Officer Corporation,
Department P Collector
Nagar Palika, Town
Urban-Municipal Py Netele
Urban and Urban and Corporation / Nagar clas ney ely
Madhya : . Commissioner of
Rural-Town And Rural- Town and Palika Nigam; Rural
Pradesh . Municipal
Country Planning
-Gram Panchayat/ Jila
Panchayat
Corporation,
Collector, Village
Panchayat
Eastern Region
Andaman And
Chief Engineer,
APWD for notified
Chief Engineer,
APWD for notified
Rural - Panchayat
Urban —Andaman
Public Works
Andaman Public
of Arunachal Pradesh
A Department for Govt.
Dicabor Area Area Institutions/ Port Blair Works Lepaitment
Municipal Council for
Private Institutions
Deputy Prepared by various Engineering Departments {be pep
Arunachal os : . Commissioner
Pradesh Commissioner, Govt. and approved by the Directorate of Higher
and Technical Education
of the respective
Districts
163
--- Page 180 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Urban and Rural-
Urban and Rural
Urban and Rural
Guwahati Metro:
GMDA or GMC
Other Urban:
Municipal
Assam Revenue Circle Office -Public Works -Public Works Corporation under
Department (Building) | Department (Building) | whose jurisdiction
the building is
situated. Rural:
Panchayat
ural = eel ja Rural - Panchayat/
circle Officer; Urban : .
an circle Officer;
- Local bodies i.e Urb Local bodi
Nagar Panchayat, Sra = Local bodies ..
: ' i.e Nagar Panchayat, | Urban: Municipal
Nagar Parisad, . :
. Nagar Parisad, Nagar | Corporation under
Urban and Rural — | Nagar Palika, Nagar : .
. : , . Palika, Nagar Nigam/ whose
Jharkhand Officer authorized by Nigam/ Regional . err
an Regional Development jurisdiction the
Deputy Commissioner Development a ee
i Authorities (as per Building is situated
Authorities (as per rere
arene e: their jurisdiction and Rural: Panchayat
their jurisdiction and
government
government ome 9 .
a notification issued time
notification issued F
: . to time)
time to time)
District Settlement
Officer,
Department of Enefirccaine Rural- Block Department of
. Settlement and Land > Settlement
Manipur Department, Govt. of | Development Officer
Records, Govt. Of Manipur Ulfbem MMiunttcterelisy and Land Records
Manipur P P Government of
Manipur,
Lamphelpat,
ay Meghalaya Urban
Meghalaya Local Revenuey AND Building PWD Building Division Development
Education Authority Division .
Authority
Aizawal Urban: Aizawal Urban: Aizawal Urban: Aizwal
Secretary, Land Aizwal Municipal Municipal Corporation
. Revenue & Settlement | Corporation Outside unicipa’ Orporano Aizawl Municipal
Mizoram . Outside Aizwal: Head .
Outside Aizwal: Aizwal: Head of the Council
of the Concerned
Secretary, Land Concerned Débartment
Revenue & Settlement Department epgrime’
Urban
Nagaland Local Revenue Executive Engineer, Architect, PWD/ Development
9 Authority PWD Housing (EDN) Housing (EDN) Department
Nagaland, Kohima
Rural- Block , Rural-Block
Development Officer f
. . Development Officer
Revenue and Disaster | Urban Housing and .
Urban - Housing and | Rural — Panchayat
. Management Urban Development -
Orissa Urban Development Samiti Urban-
Department, Govt. of | Department / Town re a
. h Department/ Town Municipality
Odisha Planning / :
Planning/
Devalonivent Development Authorit
Authority P yon.
Land Revenue Divisional Engineer sighs reel » bet Vad
Sikkim Department of the of the HRDD of 9 g Re
District respective District UrbanjDevelopment ntovEtits
2 Department Department, Sikkim
Tripuca Local Revenue Executive Engineer, Architect, PWD/ THCB Agartala Municipal
Authority
PWD
Council
164
--- Page 181 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Rural - Pradhan
of the concerned
Rural - Gram Panchayet/ Panchayat Samiti/ len Renee
Rural-B Land LRO Zilla Parishad/ DM and Executive Officer, Zilla Meck!
West B | Urban — ADM(Land Parishad Urban - Corporation/ Municipality/ Urban,Mega/Metro
est venga &LR)Metro/ Mega— Development Authority Metro/ Mega - Cor Siew)
ADM (Land&LrR) Corporation/Municipality/ Development poranic
. Municipality/
Authority
Development
Authority/
Registered Architect
Northern Region
Building of all Government owned
Institutions are compulsorily designed and
For construction of state Government owned gemsinvatsel 97 te Eiullsting Consiuaiten
nye Department, Government of Bihar. The
Institutions on Government Land, the State . . . .
: Senior Architect (Chief Architect I/C),
Government allocates Land through his aA . :
: . Ps . Building Construction Department is
cabinet decision, so Certificates, regarding . . as .
: Competent Authority to issue Certificates in
. Land use/conversion/ encumbrance and Pn
Bihar a . all matters related to Buildings of
advocate Certificates are not required. aan
. se . Government owned Institutions.
In case of private Institutions, where Land is . so
: : In the matter of private Institutions, the
registered in the Name of the society/trust/ nye . .
a . approval of Building design and its
company those Certificates are issued by the ission is given b local bodi h
respective Circle Officer of the block. PEtiatesiem IS @{vei ley tino Ustsell loots ee
as Gram Panchayat/ Nagar panchayat/
Municipal Corporation/ Regional
Development Authority
For Self Finance/
Rural — Village Private Institution
Panchayat Officer/ Urban-
Village Development Development
Officer Urban - EP Authority Rural
of Local Bodies i.e. Concerned — Sub Divisional
Sitar ance Gonsoimeel SEL Nagar Panchayat/ Construction Agency Magistrate/
Nagar Parishad/ Tehsildar For
Nagar Palika/ Nagar Government
Nigam as per their Institution Principal/
Jurisdiction Director of
Institution
Chief Executive
Officer/ Executive
Officer or
Nominated Officer
Town and Country by i
Planning pe Pheer
Department/ Development Development oH anhy ¢ ae
: A f - Executive Officer/
Development Authority/ Municipal | Authority/ Municipal . '
Uttar Pradesh . a F . . . Executive Officer or
Authority/Municipal Authority/ Zila Authority/ Zila M ‘
. : Nominated Officer
Authority / Housing Panchayat Panchayat by Distri
. y District
and Urban Planning ‘cipal
Department inwrlfe(a
Corporation,
Nagar Palika
Parishad/ Jila
Panchayat
Nagar Panchayat
165
--- Page 182 ---
Approval Process Handbook
North Western Region
Town and Country
Development
Development
Chief Administrator,
pens Authority/ Revenue Authority/ Revenue Commissioner,
Chandigarh P Authority/ Municipal | Authority/ Municipal Department of
Development en . .
: Authority/Zila Authority/ Zila Town & Country
Authority/ Municipal Panchayat Panchayat Planni
Authority y anchaya anning
Competent Authority for grant of CLU permissions for setting up of
Educational Institutions in the state of Haryana. Such CLU permissions
are required to be obtained only for the sites, which are located within
controlled area declared under the provision of act 41 of 1963. The
part of the controlled area, which falls within urbanizable zone of
development Plan can be classified area, whereas, part of the
controlled area falling with in the agriculture zone may be classified as .
. . The Director
rural area. The Change of Land use permission for setting up of .
: oe an : General, Technical
Educational Institutions in the confirming zone of urban areas is .
. . . Education
granted by Director, Town & County Planning Haryana, whereas in the
Haryana : aon Department, Govt.
agricultural zone such permission are granted by the Govt. after fH hl
relaxing the zoning regulation of respective development Plans (there Geter
is no provision in the zoning regulation to grant CLU permission for H '
setting up of Educational Institutions in agriculture zone).It is also worth aryana
mentioned here that powers to grant permission for the areas falling
within the Municipal limits, vests with Director, Urban Local Bodies,
Haryana Panchkula. The Competent Authority for sanction of Building
Plans for such CLU granted sites is respective District Town Planner,
Senior Town Planner and Director Town & Country Planning,
depending upon on the site in question
The Director,
Directorate of
Technical
Education, Govt. of
Himachal Pradesh,
Sundernagar,
District Mandi,
Himachal Pradesh
Executive Officer in
venm & Coumiiny Development Development itunielpell
Planning ; . Committees or
Departnienit/ Authority/ Revenue Authority/ Revenue Nagar
Himachal Scots inet Authority/ Municipal | Authority/ Municipal Panch 9 tand
Pradesh P Authority/ Zila Authority/ Zila ancnayar an
Authority/ Municipal
Authority of
Concerned area
Panchayat of
Concerned area
Panchayat of
Concerned area
Member Secretary
in Special Area
Development
Authority and in
Urban Areas Like
Municipal
Corporation
Architect Planner
on behalf
Commissioner,
Municipal
Corporation
166
--- Page 183 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Urban - Prepared by | Urban — Prepared by
Architect and Architect and
we. approved by approved by Municipal 7
Si aie a Municipal Authority/ Authority/ Revenue Monionenn Rural-
J&K/ LADAKH UFOT ASSIST Revenue Authority Authority Rural Pauly
Commissioner . Deputy
Revenue Rural- Prepared by | - Prepared by Architect Commissioner
Architect & approved & approved by
by Revenue Authority/ | Revenue Authority/
BDO BDO
Commissioner of Commissioner of Commissioner of Joint Director
New Delhi DDA /Municipal DDA/ Municipal DDA/ Municipal (Planning), DTTE
Corporation of Delhi | Corporation of Delhi | Corporation of Delhi 9),
In rural area
. . Tehsildar of the
Respective Senior . .
Respective Senior Town | concerned area
Town Planner of .
Planner of and in urban area
Department, Town _.
Department, Town and Municipal
. an and Country : f
Respective District . Country Planning, for Corporation/
Planning, for an area -
. Town Planner of wy . an area of the Municipal
Punjab of Building measuring woe . a
Department, Town : Building measuring up Committee/
. upto 5000 m2 Chief .
and Country Planning : to 5000m2 Chief Town Development
Town Planner, Punjab : anges
Planner, Punjab for an | Authority (if Land
for an area of ae
oye area of the Building purchased from
Building above b 2 Devel
5000m2 above 5000m evelopment
Authority) of the
Concerned area
1. Government Institute
Nagar
Land Allotment Nigam /
Icase-ot letter by District | Chief Architect or 1 acre — 4046 sq.m = 0.4 Municipal
Uthat Area Administration | Chief Engineer XEN | hectare 1 bigha = 1618 | Corporation/
Collector/SDM/ | of PWD/ RSRDC/AVS sq.m Municipality/
ADM Principal of
the Institute
Rajasthan
Nagar
Land Allotment Nigam /
In cet letter by District | Chief Architect or 1 acre — 4046 sq.m = 0.4 Municipal
Rural Area Administration | Chief Engineer XEN | hectare 1 bigha = 1618 | Corporation/
Collector/SDM/ | of PWD/ RSRDC/AVS sq.m Municipality/
ADM Principal of
the Institute
167
--- Page 184 ---
Private Institute
Approval Process Handbook
Collector/
In case SDO/ Nagar Nigam/ Nagar 1 eae 40A6 sama = Nagar Nigam/
State Govt. | Parishad/ Nagar Palika/ Municipal
of Urban . 0.4 hectare :
Area (Depending | UIT/ Local Development 1 bigha = 1618 sa.m Corporation/
in land Authority 9 a: Municipality
area
Rajasthan
Collector/
SDO/ Nagar Nigam/ Nagar _ Nagar Nigam/
In case of | State Govt. | Parishad/ Nagar Palika/ | eaie = 1022 sym = Municipal
. 0.4 hectare .
Rural Area | (Depending | UIT/ Local Development 1 bigha = 1618 sa.m Corporation/
in land Authority 9 4: Municipality
area)
South Central Region
DTCP /UDA/ Local bodies such
Municipal as Commissioner of
Corporation/ RDO/ MRO | Local Executive Municipal
Remarks: Wherever Authority (Council Commissioner in Corporation /
Andhra sanctioned and Executive Municipal Municipality/
Pradesh General Town Planning Officer) DTCP Corporation area Vice | Director, Directorate of
scheme (Master Plan) AMRDA/ Urban | Chairman in UDA DTCP Town and
and Area covered by GRP Local Bodies Country Planning is the
Schemes proposals in Competent Authority
other areas for other areas
Commissioner in GHMC
area Vice Chairman
in UDA Local body/
Local Executive Executive Authority
Authority (Council of Gram Panchayat
and Executive Remarks: Municipal
Officer) DTCP | Commissioner for GHMC
DTCP RDO (MRO) FIDE) anes Commissioner for
: local bodies wherever Urban
Remarks: Wherever Hyderabad,
c Remarks: Development
sanctioned 2 ; Warangal (UA) and
. Municipal/ Gram Authority Gram : ‘
General Town Planning Director, Directorate
Telangana Panchayat/ Local Panchayat (Gram
scheme (Master Plan) 7 - of Town and Country
Executive Panchayat is not fi
and Area covered by GRP ‘ : Planning for areas
: authority. Where applicable to
Schemes proposals in other than
athe areas sanctioned GTP Government Pidefabad
Schemes Building, subject to the ¥
Respective conditions laid down by
Commissioner/ | Andhra Pradesh (Andhra
Chairman of area Town Planning Act
Local bodies issued on 7th September
1920 is applicable for
both Andhra and
Telangana)
168
--- Page 185 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Southern Region
we Department of Town Department of town eine Cewmuis, leranting
Pondicher: xovanue Bhyistonal and Countr Town and Countn Depeninaeni
ef Officer/ Tahilsdar Plannin Y P| . y Pondicherry,
anning anning Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe
Member Secretary, CADA
we Department of Town Department of er Chonimell cine! Clirsetereii>
7 Revenue Divisional of Town and Country
Tamil Nadu 5 : and Country Town and Country .
Officer/ Tahilsdar . . Planning for
Planning Planning
areas other than
Chennai
South Western Region
Urban-Urban
Development Urban-Urban
uneasy ti femnaling Pxeoameni Urban-Urban Local | Urban-Urban Local Body/
Authority/Municipal | Authority/ Planning
. : . . Body/Rural Local Rural Local Body Local-
Planning Authority | Authority/ Municipal a
: Body Rural: Urban | Gram Panchayat (Building
Rural — Urban Planning :
Karnataka . Local Body/Gram Completion
Development Authority Rural- i
. . . . Panchayat. Certificate)
Authority/ Planning Planning Authority/
. . : Concerned Local Concerned Local body/
Authority/ Municipal | Municipal Planning bod Local G Panchayat
Planning Authority. | Authority. Concerned oy focal ram ranenaya
Govt. Land to be Local body
exempted.
. Head, Local Body/ Secretary of the
Kerala fobsiidcy Head, Local Body Town Planning Concerned Local Body
Western Region
Daman and Deputy Collector, Associate Town Associate Town
Diu Daman Planner, Daman Planner, Daman
Town & Country fois CODY TOMB Goynty Municipality/ Village
: Planning Department Planning
Goa Planning ; ; Panchayat of
Office of concerned | Department Office
Department concerned area
area of concerned area
Collector/Municipal Municipal Municipal
Corporation/ Corporation/ Corporation/ Municipal C tion/
Maharashtra- Metropolitan Metropolitan Metropolitan ete —sorporanon
k : : Metropolitan Regional
Metro Regional Regional Regional Development Authorit
Development Development Development P * Y
Authority Authority Authority
. |. Municipal
Maharashtra PolietenMboicigal Municipal Corporation/ Municipal Corporation/
Corporation/Nagar | Corporation/ Nagar 1 4
— Urban and ; . Nagar Palika/ Nagar Palika/Nagar
Palika/ Nagar Palika/ Nagar
Rural Area Nagar Panchayat/ Panchayat
Panchayat Panchayat
Gram Panchayat
DTCP Directorate of Town and Country Planning Officer; RDO Revenue Divisional Officer;
MRO Mandal Revenue Officer
HMDA Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority; UDA Urban Development Authority; GHMC Greater
Hyderabad Municipal Corporation
NOTE: In case of Zila Panchayat, copy of the Govt. Order (GO) must be produced by the Applicant before the
Committee
169
--- Page 186 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-15
Fellow Programme in Management: Conduct and Admission
Procedure
15.1 Eligibility for Admission
a. Master’s Degree or equivalent in Engineering and Technology/Management/Economics/Social
Science/Biological Science/Pure Science/Commerce/Humanities with FIRST CLASS shall be considered
for admission to Fellow programme.
b. Those appearing for their final examination in the respective discipline can also apply. Such students
if selected shall be provisionally admitted provided they complete all requirements in obtaining their
Master’s Degree before 30th September of the year of admission. The admission of these candidates
shall remain provisional until they produce the mark sheet proving that they satisfy the eligibility
criteria. The deadline for submitting the final year mark sheet is 31st December.
15.2 Admission Procedure
a. Admission to the Fellow Programme shall normally be made once a year, coinciding with that of
AICTE approved Post Graduate Diploma in Management or equivalent Degree/ Diploma.
Accordingly, the advertisement shall be made along with such Post Graduate Degree/ Diploma.
b. Application Procedure
The application shall be made in the prescribed form available with the Institution. Attested copies of
all the necessary Certificates and testimonials are to be attached with the applications. The candidate
must submit an abstract of about 5000 words on the area of research interest (tentative research
proposal) along with his/ her application.
c. Selection Criteria
Selection for the Fellow Programme in the Institutions approved by AICTE for the Fellow Programme
shall be on the basis of the following criteria:
i. Academic qualifications and work experience
ii. Tentative research proposal and its presentation before the Selection Committee
iii. Personal interview
d. The decision of the Institution Selection Committee regarding admission shall be final.
Communication shall be sent only to the selected candidates. The Institution shall not entertain any
queries or correspondence in respect of those not selected.
e. Approved Institution to conduct Fellow Programme in Management can admit only maximum of 20
candidates in each Academic Year after ensuring availability of the Guide as per AICTE Norms/
Standards.
15.3. Research Guidance
a. Selection of Guide(s)
Each candidate shall have one/ two Guide(s) under whose supervision the research work in relation
to the Programme shall be carried out. The Guide(s) shall be nominated by the Director of the
170
--- Page 187 ---
Approval Process Handbook
15.4
15.5
Institution. All Guides shall be internal. In exceptional cases, where external guidance shall be
required, recognized Guides from reputed Institutions shall be allowed as co-guides with the
permission of AICTE. Research Guides shall be allotted to the selected candidates after completion of
the necessary course work and related formalities. The research Programme and areas of research
shall be finalized by respective Guides after discussion with the candidates and should be forwarded
to the Director for concurrence.
Faculty with Ph.D and with at least 2 publications in recent times (within 3 years) in high quality
journals of repute are eligible to Guide the Fellow Programme candidates. Each such Faculty shall be
assigned a maximum of 2 candidates in each admission year.
Absence of Guide during the Programme
In Case of temporary absence of a Guide for a period of more than one year a new Guide shall be
nominated for the Fellow Candidates. In case of a Guide who has guided for more than a year, he/
she shall be allowed to resume the guidance after his/ her return from temporary absence.
If the period of absence is less than 2 years, the previous Guide shall act as Co-Guide on his/ her
return. If the period of absence is more than 2 years he/she shall cease to be a Guide for the Fellow
candidate.
Change of Guide
Change of a Guide shall be permitted in exceptional circumstances on the recommendation of the
Director.
Number of Research Fellows per Guide
At any given time, the number of Research Fellows working with a Guide shall not exceed five.
Research Advisory Committee
The Director shall nominate a Research Advisory Committee for each Fellow based on the
recommendation of the Guide(s).
Course Study/ Credit Requirements
In partial fulfilment of the requirement of the Fellow Programme, a minimum number of Course credits are
required to be earned as prescribed below
a.
Credit Requirement
171
--- Page 188 ---
Approval Process Handbook
FPO1 Research Methodology 3)
FPO2 Managerial Statistics 3
Module 1 — &
FPO3 General Management 3
FPO4 System Approach to Management 3
FPO5 3 Stream specific Course of 3 credits each 9
Module 2 — -
FPO6 Credit Seminar (General) 3)
Module 3 FPO7 Credit Seminar (Specific) 3)
FPO8 Review paper based on the literature on theThesis related topic 3)
Total Credits 30
b. Details of Courses and Seminar
The stream specific Courses and Seminars shall be decided as approved by the Director on the
recommendation by the candidate’s Guide(s) and the Research Advisory Committee.
c. Duration for earning Credit
All the credits specified above shall be earned within a maximum of three years from the date of
admission to the Programme. Extension after the three years shall be approved by the Director for
a period of one year with a review of progress every six months. Final approval shall be given by the
Director of the Institution.
d. Credit Course Requirement
A research scholar shall undergo 4 Courses of the total 12 credits in the first module and during the
second module he/ she shall undergo three streams-specific Courses of 9 credits and give three credit
Seminar on general management topic in the third module, the candidate shall give three credits
Seminar and write a review paper on the literature related to his/ her research topic for publication
purpose of 3 credits. Thus a candidate shall earn 12 credits in the first and second module and 6
credits in the third module together adding up to 30 credits in all.
e. Grading System of Credit Courses/Seminar
The minimum of CGPA of 6.5 on a 10 point scale or 60% is required for passing Course/ Seminar.
A candidate getting less than 60% shall be given one more opportunity to repeat the Course/
Seminar. If he/ she still does not pass in the Course/ Seminar, he/ she shall be terminated from the
Fellow Programme.
15.6 Registration Seminar and Progress Seminar
Each research scholar needs to register his/ her research proposal. The registration procedure is given below.
a.
Pre-registration Seminar
Each research scholar shall give a pre-registration Seminar before a Committee constituted by the
Director. The Committee shall include the Guide(s), experts drawn from Institution's Faculty members
and Director. The Seminar shall be given after completion of the three modules. The Research Scholar
shall submit 5 copies of the pre-registration Report (in about 15-20 pages) 15 days before the date
of the Seminar. The Report shall include the proposed title of the Thesis, are and frame work of the
proposed research objectives, scope of the study, hypothesis if any, and methodology to be followed.
This stage is considered to be very important for screening the candidate for further progress in the
Programme. In case the research scholar fails to defend his/her Thesis proposal successfully, he/she
shall be allowed to resubmit the modified research proposal as suggested by the above mentioned
Committee. He/ she needs to give a fresh Seminar based on the modified research proposal and in
case he or she fails to defend it in the second time, the research scholar shall be terminated from the
Programme.
172
--- Page 189 ---
Approval Process Handbook
b. Application for registration
A candidate must apply for formal registration within one month after successful completion of the
pre-registration Seminar. The application for registration to be made in a prescribed form and shall
be accompanied by the following:
i. Title and summary of the Thesis proposal approved by the Guide(s).
ii. Registration Fee of Rs. 2500/-
iii. Effective Date of Registration.
The registration shall be effective from the date of application for the registration.
15.7. _ Duration of the Programme
a. Time Limit
A Candidate shall submit his/ her Thesis only after a minimum period of two years after registration.
However, the maximum period allowed for the submission of the Thesis is five years from the date of
admission to the Programme.
If a candidate fails to submit the Thesis within the prescribed upper time limit due to reasons beyond
his/her control, he/she shall apply to the Director for an extension .If the Institution is satisfied with
the candidate's justification, the Director shall permit him/her to re-register to the Programme subject
to the payment of re-registration Fee. This re-registration shall, however, be effective only for a period
of two years beyond which no extension shall be permitted.
b. Break or Unauthorized absence from the Programme
Any break or unauthorized absence from the Programme before registration shall lead to the
cancellation of admission. Any authorized break or leave of absence shall not be counted for the
minimum period of 2 years stipulated for submission of Thesis but shall be counted in the maximum
period of 5 years permissible for submission of the Thesis.
15.8 Submission and Evaluation of the Synopsis and Thesis
a. Pre-Synopsis Seminar
Everyresearchscholarbeforesubmission ofhis/herThesis mustgivepre-Synopsis Seminar atthe Institution.
The procedure for the pre-Synopsis Seminar is as follows:
b. Submission of 5 copies of the pre-Synopsis Report (not more than 40pages). The Report shall include
the focus and the summary of the Thesis. Highlighting his/ her own contribution, details of the
methodology, results, analysis, conclusions, limitations and scope for future research. It is to be
submitted through the Guide(s).
c. For seeking the approval, the candidate shall present pre-Synopsis Seminar before the Committee
consisting of Director, Guide(s) and two Faculty experts in the relevant area of research. An outside
expert, having expertise in the area of research shall be included in the Committee
d. The Committee shall judge the work with regard to its accept ability and suggest modification or
elaboration of the work, if necessary, after incorporating the suggested changes/ modifications to the
satisfaction of the Committee, an abridged version of the same in about 15-70 pages shall be
submitted as Synopsis for the purpose of sending it to prospective examiners.
e. Submission of the Synopsis
173
--- Page 190 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Five copies of the Synopsis with necessary modification incorporated shall be submitted within a pe
riod of one month from the date of the pre-Synopsis Seminar to the Institution with a Certificate by
candidate and the Guide(s) stating:
i. That there is a prima facie case for consideration of the Thesis;
ii. That the work does not include any work which has at any time previously been submitted for
an award of Fellow in Management or other equivalent Degree.
Selection of Examiners
On receipt of Synopsis, the Director shall draw up a list of 6 possible examiners of the Thesis in con
sultation with the Research Advisory Committee and Guide(s). The examiners shall be from outside
Institution, one from India and one from abroad, having good academic and research standing in the
field. wo examiners shall be selected by the Director from the list.
Submission of Thesis
The Thesis shall be submitted in six type written/ printed copies and a soft copy with necessary
Certificates and clearance with in a period of 6 months from the date of submission of the Synopsis.
An examination Fee of Rs. 25000/- which includes an honorarium of US$250/- for foreign examiner
and Rs. 5000/- Indian Examiner must be paid along with the Thesis submission.
Recommendations of the Examiners
i. A critical review and evaluation of the quality and extent of the work of the candidate as
embodied in the Thesis.
ii. A definite recommendation as to whether the Thesis is of a sufficient standard and suitable
for the award of Fellow in Management : and
iii. If the examiner is not in a position to make definite recommendation for the award of the
“Fellow in Management”, He/ She shall indicate the required modification/ revision involving
rewriting of Chapters but not involving further research work OR Complete rewriting of the
Thesis with an additional research work reinterpretation of Data.
Acceptance/ Rejection of Thesis
The Thesis shall be accepted if all the examiners make positive recommendations. If
recommendations for rejection or inconclusive recommendations are made by anyone of the
examiner, Director shall refer the Thesis to another examiner or examiners(s) from the panel. If such
a panel of examiner(s) rejects the Thesis, it shall stand rejected.
Re-submission of the Thesis
A Thesis which needs modification/ revision shall be resubmitted after revision within a period of one
year. Rejection of the Thesis after re-submission shall normally disqualify the candidate of further
consideration for the award of the Fellow in Management.
Viva-Voce
On acceptance of the Thesis, the Director shall appoint a panel of examiners to conduct a viva- voce
examination and open defense at which the candidate shall be required to defend his/ her Thesis. The
panel of examiners shall consist of:
i. The Chairman, Dean (Academic or Research) or his/ her nominee not below the rank of
Professor of the Institution nominated by the Director
174
--- Page 191 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ii. The Guide(s)
iii. Indian External Examiner who examined the Thesis and accepted it.
The panel of Examiners shall submit their Report to the Director of the Institution.
If a Thesis has been accepted, but the candidate fails to defend it successfully at the Vice-voce
examination, he/ she shall reappear for the viva-voce examination within six months.
15.9 Award of Fellow in Management
On successful completion of the viva-voce and on the recommendations of the Institution’s Governing
Board, the Institution shall award “Fellow in Management” to the Research scholar. The title of the Thesis
shall be mentioned in the Certificate of award.
15.10 General Regulations
i. Candidate must furnish a periodical Report of progress of the Course work and research work for
consideration of Institution, Research Advisory Committee and the Guide(s). Unsatisfactory progress
in research shall render the candidate terminated from the Programme.
ii. The candidate shall pay all the prescribed Fee as and when they fall due.
iii. The Courses prescribed, but not successfully completed by the candidate shall be reconsidered by
the Director. Research Advisory Committee shall suggest alternative Course(s) depending upon the
relevance of the Course(s) to the research work of candidate.
iv. The research scholar shall face automatic disqualification and termination from the Programme, if
he/ she is found to be admitted to any other equivalent Degree Level Programme.
The Council reserves the right to amend, modify or change Regulations as may be necessary, from time to time. All
such changes shall be binding on the research scholar in the Institution.
175
--- Page 192 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-16
Structure of Various Committees
16.1 The Council
$.0.1165 (E)-in exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) and (4) of Section3 of the
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (520f1987), the Council comprises of
51 members of which following 33 members have been nominated by MoE.
The Chairman, AICTE
The Vice Chairman, AICTE
Secretary, Department of Higher Education, MoE
Additional Secretary, Technical Education, Department of Higher Education, MoE
Chairman, Central Regional Committee, AICTE
Chairman, North Western Regional Committee, AICTE Chairman, South Central Regional
Committee, AICTE Chairman, South Western Regional Committee, AICTE
hairman, All India Board of Hospitality and Tourism Management, AICTE Chairman, All
ndia Board of Architecture, AICTE
hairman, All India Board of Information and Technology, AICTE Chairman, All India
Board of Pharmacy, AICTE
Chairman, All India Board of Town and Country Planning, AICTE Joint Secretary &
Financial Advisor (MoE)
Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship Secretary, Ministry of
Electronics and Information Technology Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium
Enterprises Secretary, Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs
50
Q
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Telangana Secretary, Technical 1/3 members
Education/ Higher Education, Tripura Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education,
Uttar Pradesh Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Uttarakhand
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Arunanchal Pradesh Secretary,
Technical Education/ Higher Education, West Bengal
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Andhra Pradesh
Four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
organizations-in the field of Industry and Commerce.
Chairman, University Grants Commission, New Delhi President, Association of Indian
Universities
Executive Secretary, Indian Society for Technical Education President, Pharmacy Council of
ndia
Vice President, Council of Architecture Director General, National Productivity Council
President, Indian Institute of Metals
President, The Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers President,
nstitute of Chemical Engineers
Former Vice Chancellor of Technological University
Director, Institution of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi Director General, Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi
Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi
Member Secretary, AICTE - Member Secretary
176
--- Page 193 ---
Approval Process Handbook
16.2. The Executive Committee
The Chairman, AICTE
The Vice-Chairman, AICTE
Secretary to the Gol in Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Education
(Ex- Officio) wo Chiarmen of the Regional Committee
Three Chairman of the Board of Studies
A member of the Council representing the Ministry of Finance of the Central Government.
(Ex-Officio)
1/ 3 members
(Four out of eight members of the Council representing the States and Union Territories
on rotation)
Four Members with expertise and distinction in areas relevant to Technical Education to
be nominated by the Chairman of the Council
The Chairman, UGC (Ex-Officio) The Director, IAMR (Ex-Officio) The Director, ICAR (Ex-
Officio)
Member Secretary, AICTE - Member Secretary
16.3. Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny under Chapter | of Approval Process Handbook
Professor/ Associate Professor of IIT/ IIM/ NIT/ Government/ Government aided Institutions
An advocate registered with Bar Council
An Architect registered with Council of Architecture
or Professor /Associate Professor of Civil Engineering (Structural)
16.4 Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny under Chapter II of Approval Process Handbook
Two Professors/ Associate Professors of IIT/ IIM/ NIT/ Government/ Government aided Institutions
16.5 Expert Visit Committee
. An academician not below the Level of Professor in a field of Technical Education to be selected from the
panel of Experts approved by the Executive Committee, AICTE
° One Expert member, not below the Level of Associate Professor or an Industry expert (with minimum 5 years
of experience) to be selected from the panel of Experts.
° Architect registered with Council of Architecture or CPWD, National Buildings Construction Corporation
(NBCC),DRDO, CSIR or Professor /Associate Professor of Civil Engineering (Structural)/Assistant Professor of
Architecture or Professor/ Associate Professor of Planning
my
6.6 Standing Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee
° Retired High Court Judge or an Educationist/ academician of eminence not below the Level of
Vice- Chancellor of a University (Retired or in position) or Director (Retired or in position) of IIT/ NIT/ IIM or
Government Institution of National importance as Chairman.
° One expert member not below the Level of Associate Professor in the field of Technical Education from IITs
or IIMs or Government or Government aided Institution or Government Universities or Institutions of National
Importance.
9 An Officer not below the rank of Deputy Director of the revenue Department or an Architect registered with
Council of Architecture or Professor of Civil Engineering or Professor of Planning or expert who is well versed
with Land and revenue matters to be nominated by the Chairman, AICTE
177
--- Page 194 ---
Approval Process Handbook
NOTE:
Depending on the requirement, concerned State Government/ UT/ affiliating University/ Board representative not
below the Level of Associate Professor may be co-opted in the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee/ SHC/
SAC.
Expert Visit Committee may comprise of one Academician specialised in the Programme offered at the Institution to be
visited and the other Academician having the specialisation in Engineering and Technology Programme.
In case of Institutions Deemed to be Universities, a Vice Chancellor/ Former Vice Chancellor/ Director of IIT/ NIT
nominated by AICTE shall be the Chairman of the Expert Visit Committee
16.7 Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)
* Retired Judge of a High Court.
* Two expert members not below the Level of Associate Professor in the
fields of Technical Education.
; ; ; ; = Chairman
* An Architect, Registered with Council of Architecture or Professor of Civil Any TWO Members
Engineering.
¢ Director of Technical Education/ Registrar (Serving or Retired of Technical
Institution/ University)
16.8 Role and Responsibilities of Various Committees
The Council To perform such functions as specified in Section 10 of AICTE Act, 1987
The Executive Committee To perform such functions as assigned to it by the Council as specified in
Section 10 of AICTE Act, 1987
Scrutiny Committee Verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the Applicant as
specified in Annexure 1/2 (as applicable) of the Approval Process
Handbook.
Expert Visit Committee (EVC) Online/ Offline Visit of the premises of Institution to verify the availability of
Infrastructural facilities and Faculty with respect to the norms specified
inthe Approval Process Handbook.
Standing Hearing Committee (SHC) | To assess the compliance of the deficiencies observed in the report of the
Expert Visit Committee/ for Show Cause Notice issued to the Institution.
Standing Appellate Committee (SAC) | To assess the compliance of the deficiencies observed in Standing Hearing
Committee while considering the appeals of Institutions
Standing Complaint Scrutiny Processing of any Complaint(s) received aboutan Institution.
Committee (SCSC)
178
--- Page 195 ---
ANNEXURE-(7
Recommended Composition of Board of Governors (BoG)/
Board of Management (BoM) of the Technical Institutions
a. The Governing Body shall have at least eleven members including the Chairman and the Member Secretary.
The Registered Trust/ Society/ Company shall nominate six members including the Chairman and the Member
Secretary, and the remaining five members shall be nominated as indicated below.
b. Chairman to be nominated by the Government/ Registered Trust/ Society/ Company. The Chairman of the
Governing Body shall preferably be a technical person either Entrepreneur or an Industrialist or an
Educationist of repute who is interested in the development of Technical Education and has demonstrated an
interest in promotion of quality Education.
c. Two to five Members (Industrialist/ Technologist/ Educationist) to be nominated by the Registered Trust/
Society/Company.
d. Nominee of the affiliating University/ Board (Not applicable to PGDM Institutions).
e. Nominee of the All India Council for Technical Education (Ex-officio) (Applicable to PGDM Institutions Only).
f. Nominee of the State Government/ UT(Ex-officio).
g. An Industrialist / Technologist / Educationist from the Region nominated by the State Government / UT.
h. Principal/Director of the concerned Technical Institution (as nominee of the Trust/Society/ Company) —
Member Secretary.
i. Two Faculty members to be nominated from amongst the Regular Staff, one at the Level of Professor and one
at the Level of Associate Professor/Assistant Professor.
i- The number of members can be increased equally by adding nominees of the registered Society and by
adding an equal number of Education is from the Region keeping in view the interest of the Technical
Institution. The total number of members of a Governing Body, however, shall not exceed 21.
179
--- Page 196 ---
Approval Process Handbook
ANNEXURE-18
Mandatory Disclosures
The following information shall be given in the information Brochure besides being hosted on the Institution's official
Website.
The onus of the authenticity of the information lies with the Institution ONLY and not on AICTE.
18.1 Name of the Institution
. Address including Telephone, Mobile, E-Mai
18.2 Name and address of the Trust/Society/Company and the Trustees
. Address including Telephone, Mobile, E-Mai
18.3. Name and Address of the Vice Chancellor/Principal/Director
. Address including Telephone, Mobile, E-Mai
18.4 Name of the affiliating University
18.5 Governance
i. Organizational chart
ii. Grievance Redressal mechanism for Faculty, staff and students
iii. Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee
iv. Establishment of Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism
v. Details of Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and OMBUDSMAN by the University
vi. Establishment of Internal Committee (IC)
vii. Establishment of Committee for SC/ST
viii. Internal Quality Assurance Cell
ix Equal Opportunity facilities Cell.
18.6 Programmes
i. Name of Programmes approved by AICTE
ii. Name of Programmes Accredited by NBA
iii. Status of Accreditation of the Courses
iv. Total number of Courses
v. For each Programme the following details are to be given (Preferably in Tabular form):
a. Name
180
--- Page 197 ---
Approval Process Handbook
18.7
vi.
vii.
viii.
xi.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
XV.
Faculty
b. Number of seats
c. Duration
d. Cut off marks/rank of admission during the lastyears
Fee (as approved by the state government)
Name and duration of Programme(s) having Twinning and Collaboration with Foreign University(s)
and being run in the same Campus along with status of their AICTE approval. If there is Foreign
Collaboration, give the following details, if any:
a. Details of the Foreign University, if any
b. Name of the University
c. Address
d. Website
e. Accreditation status of the University in its Home Country
f. Ranking of the University in the Home Country
g. Whether the degree offered is equivalent to an Indian Degree? If yes, the name of the
agency which has approved equivalence. If no, implications for students in terms of pursuit
of higher studies in India and abroad and job both with in and outside the country
Nature of Collaboration
Complete details of payment a student has to make to get the full benefit of Collaboration
For each Programme Collaborated provide the following:
Programme Focus
Number of seats
Admission Procedure
Fee (as approved by the state government)
Whether the Collaboration Programme is approved by AICTE? If not whether the Domestic/ Foreign
University has applied to AICTE for approval
Course/Branch wise list Faculty members:
Permanent Faculty
Adjunct Faculty
Permanent Faculty: Student Ratio
181
--- Page 198 ---
18.10
18.11
Approval Process Handbook
Profile of Vice Chancellor/Director/Principal/Faculty
i. Name
ii. Date of Birth
iii. Unique ID
iv. Education Qualifications
v. Work Experience
vi. Teaching/ Research/ Industry/ Others
vii. Area of Specialization
viii. Courses taught at Diploma/ Post Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate/ Post Graduate Diploma
Level
ix. Research guidance (Number of Students)
x. No. of papers published in National/International Journals/Conferences
xi. Master (Completed/Ongoing)
xii. Ph.D. (Completed/Ongoing)
xiii. Projects Carried out
xiv. Patents (Filed & Granted)
xv. Technology Transfer
xvi. Research Publications (No. of papers published in National/International Journals/Conferences)
xvii. No. of Books published with details (Name of the book, Publisher with ISBN, year of publication, etc.)
Fee
i. No. of Fee waivers granted with amount and name of students
ii. Number of scholarship offered by the Institution, duration and amount
Admission
i. Number of seats sanctioned with the year of approval
ii. Number of Students admitted under various categories each year in the last three years
iii. Number of applications received during last year for admission under Management Quota and
number admitted
Admission Procedure
i. Mention the admission test being followed, name and address of theTest Agency/State Admission
Authorities and its URL (website)
182
--- Page 199 ---
Approval Process Handbook
vi.
vii.
viii.
xi.
18.12 Criteria
iv.
Number of seats allotted to different Test Qualified candidate separately (AIEEE//JEE/ CET (State
conducted test/ University tests/ CMAT)/ Association conducted test etc.)
Calendar for admission against Management quota seats:
Last date of request for applications
Last date of submission of applications
Dates for announcing final results
Release of admission list (main list and waiting list shall be announced on the same day)
Date for acceptance by the candidate (time given shall innocase be less than 15 days)
Last date for closing of admission & Starting of the Academic session
The waiting list shall be activated only on the expiry of date of main list
The policy of refund of the Fee, in case of withdrawal, shall be clearly notified
and Weightages for Admission
Describe each criterion with its respective weightages i.e. Admission Test, marks in qualifying
examination etc.
Mention the minimum Level of acceptance, if any
Mention the cut-off Levels of percentage and percentile score of the candidates in the admission
test for the last three years
Display marks scored in Testetc. and in aggregate for all candidates who were admitted
18.13 List of Applicants
List of candidate whose applications have been received along with percentile/percentages core for each of the
qualifying examination in separate categories for open seats. List of candidate who have applied along with percentage
and percentile score for Management quota seats (merit wise)
18.14 Results of Admission Under Management seats/Vacant seats
Composition of selection team for admission under Management Quota
List of candidate who have been offered admission
Waiting list of the candidate in order of merit to be operative from the last date of joining of the first
list candidate
18.15 Information of Infrastructure and Other Resources Available
Number of Class Rooms and size of each
Number of Tutorial rooms and size of each
Number of Laboratories and size of each
Number of Computer Centres with capacity of each
183
--- Page 200 ---
Approval Process Handbook
v. Central Examination Facility, Number of rooms and capacity of each
vi. Online examination facility (Number of Nodes, Internet band width, etc.)
Vii. Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons
viii. Fire and Safety Certificate
ix. Hostel Facilities
x. Number of Library books/ebooks/Titles/Journals available (Programme-wise)
xi. List of online National/International Journals subscribed
xii. National Digital Library (NDL) subscription details
xiii. List of Major Equipment/Facilities in each Laboratory/Workshop
xiv. List of Experimental Setup in each Laboratory/Workshop
xv. Innovation Cell
xvi. Social Media Cell
xvii. Compliance of the Academic Bank of Credit (ABC), applicable to PGCM/ PGDM Institutions
and University Departments
xviii. To upload the respective short video (1-2 min) of Infrastructure and facilities available
w.rt the courses in the website
xix. Games and Sports Facilities
XX. Teaching Learning Process
xxi. For each Post Graduate Courses give the following:
xxii. Title of the Course
xxiii. Laboratory facilities exclusive to the Post Graduate Course
18.16 Enrolment and placement details of students in the last 3years
18.17 List of Research Projects/Consultancy Works
18.18 MoUs with Industries
NOTE: Suppression and/or misrepresentation of information shall invite appropriate penal action.
The Website shall be dynamically updated with regard to Mandatory Disclosures
184
--- Page 201 ---
AFFIDAVIT-I
(For creation of New Password/Forgotten Password)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for creation of new password for our institution <name and address of institution>
vide application dated .............
2. That |/we shall abide by all the terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook
2024-27;
3. That I/we have forgotten/ misplaced the password for our <user ID>;
4. That I/we am/are authorized to submit the present request and there is no misrepresentation;
5. That I/we have made an online payment of Rs. 6000/- vide Transaction ID..... date.....;
6. That the new login credentials are to be sent to <Name of the Person>, <Address>, <Landline No>,
<Mobile No>, <email id>; and
7. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material facts have been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
I/we, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material facts have been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
185
--- Page 202 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-2
(For the applications submitted under Chapter I/II/IV except
Closure of the Institution)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for .......... eee cece eee vide application dated ..........
2. That I/ we will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook 2024-27.
3. That the information given by <Name(s)>in the application made to AICTE is true and complete. Nothing is
false and no information/ material has been concealed;
4. That the Institution is functioning in the location as approved by the Council;
5. That I/we have uploaded the Occupancy/Completion Certificate/Building License/Form D issued by the
Competent Authority and the Structural Stability Certificate by the Competent Authority;
6. That the Trust/ Society/ Company runs the following other Institutions in the same Campus; Total Built-Up
Area available
7. That I/we have uploaded valid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority;
8. That Principal of the Institution is regular and qualified as per AICTE norms;
39
4
hat the Faculty norms as well as Faculty : Student ratio is maintained as per Approval Process Handbook
and the Faculty data uploaded is true and complete;
10. That the Institution has fulfilled the norms for Faculty and Infrastructural facilities for Reinstatement of “Re
duction in Intake”;
11. That the I/we not demanded/ retained the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members;
12. That the declaration, information and documents submitted/uploaded as per Annexure-1/2 of the Approval
Process Handbook with regard to Land, Built-up area (Instructional area, Administrative area and Amenities
area) and other Infrastructure therein where the letter of approval/ Extension of Approval is sought for
< Name of the Institution>is true, complete and nothing is false;
13. That the Land is contiguous, there is no dispute pertaining to the said Land;
14. That if any of the information is found to be false, incomplete, misleading and/ or that the<Name(s)>fail(s)
to disclose all the information and/ or suppress any information and/ or misrepresent the information, the
Council shall also be free to take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval and/or any other action as
deemed fit against the <Name(s)> and others as the case may be and/ or the individuals associated with
the Trust/ Society/ Company and/ or the Institution;
15. That the Land/Built-up area details given below in the Table are true and complete;
<Reproduce only appropriate section(s) related to application in the table below>
186
--- Page 203 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Total area in Acre
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
16.
17.
18.
19.
That I/we have submitted/uploaded all the additional documents/information regarding resolution/ NOC’s/
Certificates/ details of Building completion (partial/full) in AICTE Web-Portal in respect of our application (as
applicable) and the same is true and complete;
That I/we have uploaded the details of faculties, Administrative and supporting Staff over portal. And
Institute is adhering with pay scale, gross pay, PF deduction and TDS as per the Central / State / local
authority norms as applicable;
That I/we have uploaded all the student data of the previous years and the same is true and complete;
That no students have been admitted without the approval of concerned regulatory bodies
That the financial transactions have been done only by digital payment;
That the declaration, information and documents pertaining to the availability of Faculty is true
and complete. Nothing is false and no information/ material has been concealed;
That liabilities, if any, arise out of the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and
vice- versa/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level Institution shall solely be that of <Name of the
Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;
That liabilities, if any, arise out of Change of Site/ Location shall solely be that of <Name of Trust/ Society/
Company/ Technical Institution>;
That liabilities if any, arise out of Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/
Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s)/ Change of affiliating University/ Board shall
solely be that of < Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;
That admission to NRI/Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries/ Collaboration and
Fellow Programme shall be strictly within the limit and shall be done on Merit basis and liability, if any,
arise out of the same shall solely be that of<Name of the Trust/Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;
That Audited statement of accounts of the Trust/Society/Company for the previous year has been uploaded;
That all Faculty and all non-teaching Staff data and all student data of all years and all Course(s),
as entered by the Head of the Institution as per the prescribed Format on the Web-Portal are correct;
That the hostel facilities of International Standards for NRI/Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian workers in
Gulf Countries/Collaboration and established an Office and Student Counsellor to take care of the issues
of such students admitted are provided. Further, their entry and exit shall be adhered to the norms specified
under Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India;
That the Sports facilities are provided to the students;
That the Internal Quality Assurance Cell before commencement of the Academic Session ......... in respect
of <application number><Name and address of Institution> is constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/
will be constituted (in case of new Technical Institutions);
187
--- Page 204 ---
Approval Process Handbook
31. — That the following Committees as per Chapter VI of the Approval Process Handbook before
commencement of the Academic Session ......... in respect of<application number><Name and
address of Institution> are
constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/will be constituted (in case of new Technical Institutions);
. Anti-Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education notified Regulation for
prevention and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide No. 37-3/
Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated 01.07.2009)
. Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment of OMBUDSMAN by the
University. (As per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students)
Regulation, 2019 vide FNo.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019)
. Internal Committee (IC) (As per Section 4 All India Council for Technical Education (Gender
Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees and Students
and Redressal of Grievances in Technical Institutions) Regulations, 2016
. Committee for SC/ ST (As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 OF 1989, dated11.09.1989)
32. That, the Institutions uploaded the Annual Report of IC in the AICTE Web-Portal.
33. That, the Institution undertakes to submit that all the employments in the Institution shall be as per the
norms of the existing Labour Law and the payments shall be as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages
Act of State/ UTs/ Central Government.
(Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of — month, year ... at my office. (Judicial First
Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
188
--- Page 205 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-3
(For submitting the Security Deposit Upon establishment of New
Technical Institution /New Programme / New Level)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1.
That I/we have applied for the establishment of Institution<Name and address of proposed Institution>
vide application <application number> dated ..........
That in accordance with the norms, procedures and conditions prescribed by AICTE, an amount of Rs.
beceeeeeeeeeeneee was deposited by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> in AICTE’s account, for a
Rsperiod of 10 years;
That the interest accrued on the deposit shall be retained by AICTE and used for improving the quality of
Technical Education;
That AICTE in its discretion shall extend the term of the deposit for a further period and/ or forfeit the amount
for violation of norms, conditions and requirements prescribed by AICTE and/ or non- performance by the
Institution and/ or Closure of the Institution due to withdrawal of AICTE approval or for any other reason. In
an event of forfeiture, the proceeds of the fixed deposit shall be utilized for meeting the expenditure towards
refunds to the students and others;
That all remaining requirements as mentioned under the Regulations and the Approval Process
Handbook 2024- 27, as applicable, by <Name and address of proposed Institution>shall be complied
within one month from the date of issuance of the approval letter;
That the Land measuring ...... Acre, on which <Name of the proposed Institution>is located was not
mortgaged for any purpose to any Institution on the date of filing the application and that status is continuing
till date and shall continue till the date of issuance of the letter of approval (Not applicable for New
Programme / New Level);
In the event of Non-Compliance by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>and/ or<Name of the
proposed Institution>with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event of
violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action,
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise
out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the (Society/ Institution); and
That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
|/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at < name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponents on this — day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
(SEAL)DEPONENT(s)
189
--- Page 206 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-4
(For the Progressive/Complete Closure of the Institution)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... ,
aged....., resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for the Progressive/ Complete Closure of our Institution <Name and address of
Institution> vide application <application number> dated ..........
2. That our Trust <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> vide resolution.....Resolved for closing the
Institution and has applied for Closure of <Name and address of Institution> in the Web-Portal and had
paid the requisite Fee .......... as per AICTE norms;
3. That liabilities, if any, arise out of Closure of above said Institution shall be solely of Trust/ Society/
Company;
4. That the Trust/ Society/ Company undertakes that no further admission of students shall be made in the
current and forthcoming years;
5. That Trust/ Society/ Company undertakes to provide all the facilities to the existing students till they pass out;
6. That Trust/ Society/ Company has submitted/ uploaded all the additional documents/ information regarding
resolution/ NOCs/ Certificates in AICTE Web-Portal in respect of our application (as applicable) and the
same is true and complete;
7. That the FDR was neither mortgaged nor encashed;
Details of RPGF/ Joint FDR
Details of RPGF/
Joint FDR/ RTGS
made with AICTE/
Board for the
establishment of
the Institution
8. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
NOTE: (SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed on
Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of Rs. 100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a First Class
Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.
190
--- Page 207 ---
AFFIDAVIT-8
(For the compliance of AICTE norms For Universities apply-
ing as per Chapter IV notified by the UGC)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for ..........eeeeeeee cece eee vide application <application number> dated ..........
2. That the <Name> University is fulfilling AICTE norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook
2024-27. If any complaint arises, AICTE has the right to inspect the premises and if the complaint is found to
be true, the Council shall take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval.
3. That the information given by the above named University in the application made to AICTE is true and
complete. Nothing is false and no information/ material has been concealed.
4. That if any of the information is found to be false, incomplete, misleading and/ or that the above named
University fails to disclose all the information and/ or suppress any information and/ or misrepresent the
information, the Council shall take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s}
VERIFICATION
I/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at < name of the place> on this the <date>
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponents on this — day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
191
--- Page 208 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-6
(For the Release of Security Deposit)
I/ We, <Name, Chairperson/ Secretary <Name of Trust/ Society/ Company>, Son / daughter of ..... aged .....
Resident of ..... do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That our Institution viz., ..... had created a security deposit (in the form of ........... ) for Rs. ..... for the maturi
ty period of 8 years /10 years from ......... to...... in the joint name of the Secretary, <Name of the Trust
and the AICTE, ..... Maturity of said deposited towards ..... Programme was due on <date >
2. That no cognizable action is pending against the Institution;
3. That all the conditions of LoA have been fulfilled by the Institution;
4. That the Institution is functioning at its approved permanent site;
5. That the Institution is not operating on a temporary site;
6. That the Institution has not been put under No Admission Category;
7. That no inquiry is pending against the Institution;
8. That no adverse action is being contemplated against the Institution;
9. That no Fee refund case is pending in the Institution;
10. No Complaint is pending under investigation relating to misappropriation/ defalcation/ embezzlement of
money by the Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company; and
11. The said FDR was not mortgaged/ renewed (not applicable to RTGS). Further, in case any violation is found,
the Security Deposit will be refunded to AICTE by the Trust.
(Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
I/ We, the above name deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
192
--- Page 209 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-7
(For transfer of private Property / Building)
I/ We, <name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <name of the Society/ Trust/Company>, son / daughter of ......... aged
ceeeeeeeeeeeeees , resident of , (Lessor) do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:-
1. That I/we hand over the possession of my/ our Property/ Building No... (detailed address of the Property/
Building ) to (Lessee), <name>, Chairperson/ Secretary,<name of the Trust/Society/Company>, to run a
Technical Institution (name and address).
2. 1/We will abide by all the provisions contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the
time being in forcwe relating to transfer of Property/ Building to or by Companies, Associations or bodies of
individuals while transferring the aforesaid Property/ Building to the Lessee.
3. That there are no legal issues pending with regard to this property before any court of Law hampering the
transfer of this Property/ Building to the Lessee;
4. That the lease of Property/ Building is irrevocable for 30 years of which 25 years are still alive;
5. That there are no financial liabilities against this Property/ Building before transfer of the same to the Lessee;
6. That both the Lessor and Lessee shall abide by the Local Municipal Laws and other Laws of the Land relating
to this Property/ Building;
7. That the Lessee shall not have any right to sub-lease this Property/ Building to any other entity/person.
8. That henceforth, the Lessee shall be liable to pay all the taxes of this Property/ Building under the different
Local Municipal Laws and other Laws of the Land; and
9. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/our knowledge. No part of the same is false and
no material has been concealed therefrom.
Names of both the parties (Lessor and Lessee) or their authorized persons executing the undertaking.
LESSOSOR LESSEE
DEPONENT(S)
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at < name of the place> on this the <date>.
LESSOSOR LESSEE
DEPONENT(S)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponents on this — day of — month, year ... at my office. (Judicial First
Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
193
--- Page 210 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-8
(For Additional Course/ Increase in Intake)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ....., aged.....,
resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for additional Course/ increase in intake of our Institution <Name and address of
Institution> vide application <application number> dated .........
2. That above named Trust/Society/Company vide a resolution resolved to apply for additional Course/ increase
in intake in above named Institution in the Web-Portal and had paid the requisite TER Charges as per AICTE
norms;
3. That we have created all the additional facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel (wherever applicable), Faculty,
etc. for meeting the requirements of additional Course/increase in the Intake.
hat liabilities, if any, arise out of additional Course/ increase in the Intake in the above named institutions
all be solely of the above named Trust/ Society/ Company>; and
s
ate!
5. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
SEAL
DEPONENT(S)
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at < name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
SEAL
DEPONENT(S)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponents on this — day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
194
--- Page 211 ---
AFFIDAVIT-9
(For change in the Bank details)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ..... , do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for change in the Name of the Bank of our Institution <Name and address of
Institution> vide application <application number> dated .........
2. \/ We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook 2024-27;
3. That there is no commercial or business angle for change of <Name of the old Bank> to < Name of the
new Bank>;
4. That the Change in the Name of the Bank / Address of the Bank of Institute / Trust / Society / Company is by
virtue of Merger of the Banks / Closure of the Bank / Closure of account of old Bank / etc.
5. That in the event of Non-Compliance by the above named Trust/ Society/ Company and or above named
Institution with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event of violation of any
of the terms of undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action including with
drawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise out of such with
drawal shall solely be that of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Institution;
6. That there are no legal issues pending with both old and new Banks;
7. That there are no financial liabilities with the <Name of the old Bank>;
8. That liabilities, if any, arise out of change of Name of the Bank shall be solely that of the above named
Trust/ Society/ Company; and
9. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
I/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
195
--- Page 212 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-10
(For Change in the Name / Address of the Trust / Society/
Company)
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ..... , do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company of our Institution <Name
and address of Institution> vide application <application number> dated .........
2. That I/ We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook 2024-27;
3. That there is no commercial or business angle for change of <Name of the old Trust/ Society/ Company>
to <Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company>;
4. That in the event of Non-Compliance by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> and/ or <Name of
the proposed Institution> with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event of
violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise
out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Institution;
5. That there are no legal issues pending with both old and new Trust/ Society/ Company;
6. That there are no financial liabilities in the old Trust/ Society/ Company Name;
N
4
hat the Land and Building are in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company;
2
4
hat liabilities, if any, arise out of change of Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company shall be solely that of
new <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>; and
9. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
196
--- Page 213 ---
AFFIDAVIT-I
(For Collaboration and Twinning Programme Between
Foreign University / Institution OR Institute of National Importance /
Eminence of India and AICTE Approved Institution
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of .....
aged....., resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1. That I/we have applied for Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Foreign University/ Institution
<Name and address of Institution> and AICTE Approved Institution in India <Name and address of
Institution> vide application <application number> dated .........
2. That the Degree/Diploma and post Diploma awarded to the students in India shall be recognized in the
Parent Country and shall be treated equivalent to the corresponding Degrees/Diploma/Graduate, post
Diploma awarded by the University /Institution in<Country of origin of University/Foreign Institution>;
3. That the Institution for which application for approval is being made shall offer Programme(s) and
Course(s) approved by the Council;
4. That the Institution for which application for approval is being made shall admit students as per Intake
approved by the Council;
5. That University/ Institution shall declare the detailed guidelines for admission, entry Level qualifications,
Fee of all kinds, the examination and evaluation and award of degree that there shall not be major
deviations with the prescribed procedures in their Parent Country, vis-vis India;
6. That the students admitted under the Twinning Programme will spend at least one Semester for the two
years Programme and two Semesters for four years Programme in the Foreign University/ Institution in its
Parent Country;
7. That admission to Collaboration and Twinning Programme shall be strictly within the limit and shall be done
on Merit basis and liability, if any, arise out of the same shall solely be that of<Name of the Trust/ Society/
Company/ Technical institution>;
8. That MoU is executed to accommodate those students, who fail to get VISA, in the local affiliating
University/ Institution to continue his/ her Education; and
9. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
The above named deponenit(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>. (Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this- day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
197
--- Page 214 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-12
(For Conducting Academic Course(s) of other Regulatory
Bodies)
I/ We, <name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <name of the Society/ Trust/Company>, son / daughter of ......... aged
beceeeeneeeeeees , resident of , (Lessor) do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:-
1. That I/we have applied for conducting academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body <Name of the
Regulatory Body> vide application <application number> dated .........
2. That our above named Trust/ Society/ Company vide resolution Resolved to conduct academic Course(s) of
other Regulatory Body and had paid the requisite TER Charges as per AICTE norms;
gs
4
he Institution(s) approved by AICTE in the Campus has/ have all the facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel
if applicable), Faculty, etc. for meeting the demands of all the Courses, in addition to the proposed
academic Course(s).
4. That we are using the excess facilities available / have created all the additional facilities such as ......... for
meeting the requirements of academic Course(s).
5. That liabilities, if any, arise out of academic Course(s) shall be solely that of the Trust/ Society/ Company
named above; and
6. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.
(Name of the authorized person(s) executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
SEAL
LESSOSOR DEPONENT(S)
VERIFICATION
\/ We, the above named deponenit(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
SEAL
DEPONENT(S)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this - day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
NOTE:
198
--- Page 215 ---
Approval Process Handbook
AFFIDAVIT-13
[For Conducting Open and Distance Learning (ODL) / Online
Learning Mode]
I/we, <Name>, Chairperson/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son/ daughter of ..... , aged.....,
resident of ..... , do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as under:
1.
That I/we have applied for conducting Open and Distance Learning Courses / Online Learning Mode
Courses vide application <application number> dated .........
That the information given in the application made to AICTE is true and complete. Nothing is false and no
information/ material has been concealed;
That the Institution Headquarter is functioning in the location as approved by the Council;
That the Trust/ Society/ Company runs the following other Institutions in the same Campus; Total Built-Up
Area available Name of the Institution Programmes/Courses offered Built-Up Area Approved by AICTE or Not
That the institution has appointed faculty members as per AICTE guidelines.
That the information provided regarding the Learner Support Centres are true and complete.
That the information provided regarding the Examination Centres are true and complete.
That the following Committees as per 6 of Approval Process Handbook 2024-27 before commence
ment of the Academic Session...... in respect of <application number><Name and address of Institution>
are constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/ will be constituted (in case of new Technical Institutions); and
* Anti Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education notified Regulation for preven
tion and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009
dated 01.07.2009).
* Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment of OMBUDSMAN by the University.
(As per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students) Regulation ,2019
vide FNo.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019)
* Internal Committee (IC) As per Section 4 All India Council for Technical Education (Gender Sensitization,
Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees and Students and Redressal of
Grievances in Technical Institutions) Regulations, 2016.
* Committee for SC/ ST As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities Act,
1989, No. 33 OF 1989, dated 11.09.1989).
That, the Institution undertakes to submit that all the employments in the Institution shall be as per the norms
of the existing Labour Law and the payments shall be as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act of
State/ UT/ Central Government.
. In the event of Non-Compliance of guidelines/norms prescribed by AICTE or violation of any of the
undertakings, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action, including withdrawal of approval and the
liabilities, arising out, if any shall be solely of the Trust/ Society/ Company/Institution.
199
--- Page 216 ---
Approval Process Handbook
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
VERIFICATION
I/ We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed therefrom.
Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent(s) on this - day of — month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
200
--- Page 217 ---
FORMAT-1
No Objection Certificate from the State Government/ UT
The<Name of the Trust/Society/Company>vide its Executive meeting held on at vide item no.
have passed a resolution for the
i. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year
ii. | Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address> ,(new)
iii. | Conversion of Women’s Institutes into Co-edInstitution / Co-edlInstitution Women’s Institution
iv. | Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
v. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme<Coursel1... (Intake)> in the Institution
vi. Closure of the Institution
vii. Change the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from <Name of the present Trust/ Society/
Company> at <address> to <Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company > at<address>
<Name of the Institution>at<address>, Vide application ref. No Date: made by the Trust/Society/
Company Name ..... Address as at .....
This is to confirm that the <State Government/UT> has no objection for the Institution applied for
i. Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year
ii. | Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address> ,(new)
iii. | Conversion of Women’s Institutes into Co-edInstitution / Co-edlInstitution Women’s Institution
iv. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/Degree Level into Diploma Level
V. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme <Coursel... (Intake)> in the Institution
vi. Closure of the Institution
vii. Change the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from <Name of the present Trust/ Society/
Company> at <address> to <Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company > at<address>
<Name of the Institution> at <address>.
Liabilities, if any, on this count shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant of the Trust/ Society/ Company
and shall be settled as per the rules and Regulations as applicable.
Authorized Signatory
<State Government/ UT>
NOTE: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be accepted.
*Strike off whichever is not applicable.
201
--- Page 218 ---
Approval Process Handbook
FORMAT-2
No Objection Certificate from the Affiliating University/ Board
The <Name of the Trust/ Society / Company> vide its Executive meeting held on ..... at .....vide item no.
have passed a resolution for the
i. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year
ii. Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old)
to<Name of the Institution>at<address>, (New)
iii. | Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution / Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution
iv. | Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
v. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme<Coursel1.....(Intake)> in the Institution
vi. Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the Institution(s)> at
<address>, under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus
vii. Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course <Name of the Course>
viii. Starting of New Course <Name of the Course>
ix. Starting of Division in Indian Language <Name of the Course>
x. Closure of the Institution
xi. Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>
xii. Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)
xii. Change in the Name of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address> to <Name of
the Institution> at <address>
xiv. Change in the Name of the affiliating University/ Board from <Name of the present University/
Board> at <address> to <Name of the new University/ Board> at<address>
xv. Change the Name of the Trust from <Name of the present Trust> at <address> to <Name of the
new Trust> at<address>
<Name of the Institution >at<address>, Vide application ref. No ...... Date:...... made by the Trust/
Society/ Company Name ..... Address as at .....
This is to confirm that the<affiliating University/Board> ......... has no objection for the
i. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year
ii. | Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old)
to<Name of the Institution>at<address>, (new)
iii. | Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution/ Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution
iv. | Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
v. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme <Coursel..... (Intake.....)> in the Institution
1/3
202
--- Page 219 ---
Approval Process Handbook
vi.
vii.
viii.
xi.
xii.
xiii.
Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the Institution(s)>at<address>,
under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus/City
Introduction of Integrated Degree Course <Name of the Course>. Also it is confirmed that the said
Integrated Degree Course is available in the approved nomenclature of the University
Starting of new Course <Name of the Course>
Closure of the Institution, <Course]..... (Intake.....), Course2 ..... (Intake.....),>
Mention Programme(s) and Course(s) where Closure of the Institution/ Programme is applied for:
Closing of MCA Course and Introduction of MBA/ PGDM Course/ Closing of MBA/ PGDM Course and
Introduction of MCA Course
Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>
Conversion of Courses into allied Vocational Courses
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/
Course(s)
Re-arrangement of current students/ students who were admitted in these Courses in the previous years and who
are trailing due to failures, etc. are mentioned in the following table:
Current Staff strength, re-arrangements and dues, if any, shall be settled as per existing norms and Regulations
on that behalf.
Course requested for Closure Number of current students Number of students admitted in these
xiv.
XV.
xvi.
Course(s) in the previous years and who are trailing due to failures Details about re- arrangements of
students
Change in the Name of the Institution from<Name of the Institution>at<address>to<Name of the
Institution > at<address>
Change in the Name of the affiliating University/ Board from <Name of the present University/ Board>
at <address> to <Name of the new University/ Board> at<address>
Change in the Name of the Trust from <Name of the present Trust> at <address> to <Name of the new
Trust> at<address>
<Name of the Institution> at <address>.
Liabilities if any, on this count shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant of the Trust/Society/ Company and
shall be settled as per the rules and Regulations as applicable.
Registrar/ Director
<affiliating University/ Board >
Note: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be accepted
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
xvi.
Change in the Name of the Trust from <Name of the present Trust> at <address> to <Name of the new
Trust> at<address>
203
--- Page 220 ---
Approval Process Handbook
<Name of the Institution> at <address>.
Liabilities if any, on this count shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant of the Trust/Society/ Company and
shall be settled as per the rules and Regulations as applicable.
Registrar/ Director
<affiliating University/ Board >
Note: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be accepted
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
204
--- Page 221 ---
FORMAT-3
Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company
That the Trust/ Society/ Company vide its Executive meeting held on ......... at vide item no. have resolved, for
the
i. Establishment of new Technical Institution and apply to AICTE for approval to start<Name of the
Institution>to offer Technical Education in<Programme>and shall allocate, Land at <complete address
with survey numbers, plot numbers> measuring Acre, earmarked for the proposed <Name of
the Technical Institution> at <full address> required funds for creation of carpet and Built-up area
ii. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year
iii. Introduction of NRIs in the following Programme(s)/Course(s)
iv. | Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address>(new)v. Conversion of existing Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution/
Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution in the Name of<proposed <Name of the Institution
vi. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
vii. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme(s)<Course1.....(Intake )>
viii. Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the Institution>at<address>,
<Name of the Institution>at<address>, under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus
ix. Introduction of OCI/Foreign Nationals/Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries in the following
Programme(s)/Course(s)
x. Increase in Intake in Course(s)/Additional Course(s)/Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course/
Fellow Programme in Management
xi. Closure of the Institution
xii. Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>
xiii. Change in the Name of the Course(s)/Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)
xiv. Change the Name of the Institution from<Name of the Institution>(Old)at<address>to<Name of the
Institution> (new)
xv. _ Change in the Minority Status of the Institution from <Type of the Institution> to <Type of the Institution>
xvi. Change in the Name of the affiliating University/Board from<present University/Board>to the new
University/ Board. Also it is resolved that, < Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company > shall apply for
NOC to both the Universities
xvii. Change in the Name of the Bank
xviii. Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>
205
--- Page 222 ---
Approval Process Handbook
(Old) at<address>to<Name of the Trust/ Society/Company> (new)
xix. Introduction of Collaboration and Twinning Programme with <Name of the University/ Institution>/
Necessary facilities shall be provided to the students of <Name of the University/ Institution>
xx. Application wrongly submitted for ............. and to be changed from <Application for ..... >to
<Application for.....>/Not interested in applying for....../revoke the application submitted for
<li >.Paid the necessary TER Charges along with the Penalty for Late Submission, as applicable.
< Name of the Institution>at<address>.
<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>shall also allocate required funds for the creation of the requisite
facilities such as procurement of......Acre of Land ,additional carpet and Built-up area, appointment
of required Faculty, procurement of Equipment, furniture, for creation of suitable hostel/residential
accommodation for the students of Foreign Nationals/Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian
Workers in Gulf Countries and other required entities as applicable for the smooth functioning of the
same.
<Name of the Institution>shall apply for,
1. Change in the Name of the Course(s) in <Course]..... (Intake.....), Course2 ..... (Intake.....),>
2. ReductioninIntakein< Course] > ,from<currentIntake>to<reducedIntake>,<Course2>,from
<current Intake> to <reduced Intake>
3. Closure of Programme<Programmel >, <Programme2>.
4. Closure of Course(s) <Coursel>, <Course2>.
(Signature and Name of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust / Society/ Company), (Designation), (Name of
the Organization)
NOTE: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be accepted
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
206
--- Page 223 ---
FORMAT-4
MoU to be Signed between the Institution and Skill Knowledge
Providers/ Trainers
Agreement
Under the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) of the All India Council for Technical Education This
Agreement is entered into and executed on this ..... day of ....., 2021.. at New Delhi.
By and Between <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> offering <Name of the Institution> represented by its
Chairman. which expression shall, where the context so admits, be deemed to include its successors,
executors and administrators of the ONE PART AND
<Name of the SKP> (hereinafter referred to as the “ ”) a Company registered under the Company Act, 1956,
through its <Name and Designation of the Signing Authority> having it’s registered/approved Office at (which
expression, unless it be repugnant to the context or meaning thereof, shall be deemed to mean and include their
executors, administrators and assigns), party of the SECOND PART.
WHEREAS, the All India Council for Technical Education has initiated a scheme to provide competency based skills
under the National Skill Qualification Framework (Here in after to be referred as NSQF)
WHEREAS, in terms of the said scheme launched by All India Council for Technical Education, AICTE has extended
invitation to various Institutions/ Organisations to join as Vocational Educational Institutions to provide education
component and Skill Knowledge Providers to provide Competency Based Skills.
WHEREAS under the scheme a Skill Knowledge Provider is required to perform the role and function of providing
hands on skill training in a specific sector i.e. in the Automobiles Sector, Skill Knowledge Provider shall be the service
centre of authorized automobile manufacturers located preferably all over the Country or in the IT Sector, the Skill
Knowledge Provider shall be the training sector of authorized IT Company located preferably all over the Country. The
Skill Knowledge Provider could also be one who is established for imparting hands on skills or training in a respective
sector;
WHEREAS the First Party is to participate as an Institution to register students under the National Skill Qualification
Framework (NSQF);
WHEREAS the Second Party has expressed its keen interest and desire to be a key Partner in the execution of the
National Vocational Educational Qualification Framework in terms of the objectives of the scheme and policy as
highlighted and specified in the said framework and particularly in view of the desire and interest of <NAMEOFSKP>
to join and Partner with <Name of the Institution>in providing competency based skills through its centres which shall
act as Skill Knowledge Provider for the purposes of the scheme;
WHEREAS Both parties have held discussions and agreed for collaboration for conducting Vocational Education
Programme(s) under the education scheme of the NSQF, where by <Name of the Institution> will impart and a ward
credits for the “Academic’ content” of the Curriculum and <Name of the SKP> will provide skill training through its
training centres called <Name of the SKP> - SKP’s and will impart and award credits for such ‘Skill oriented training’
content of the Curriculum to the registered students.
WHEREAS The Second Party has registered it self with the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE)/ Concerned
Authority and obtained approval there of to participate as <Name of the SKP> under the National Skill Qualification
Framework (NSQF);
THEREFORE, both the parties hereby agree to conduct Vocational Educational Programme initiated by AICTE
under NSQE, on the following terms and conditions:
1. The <Name of the SKP> agrees that centres approved and recognized by <Name of SKP>
(herein after to be referred as “<Name of SKP> -SKP”), shall act and perform the role of Skill
207
--- Page 224 ---
Approval Process Handbook
Knowledge Provider to provide hands on skill training in specific sectors such as <Name of Sector
Specific Skill>.
2. The <Name of the SKP> agrees and undertakes that its <Name of the SKP> shall register with
AICTE for
conduct of training modules under the Vocational Stream and shall perform following functions:
. Announce the schedule of module for the calendar year.
° Register students for the modules.
° Conduct the modular training.
° Conduct examination/evaluate the student, award the grade indicating the Level of skill acquired.
. The <Name of the SKP> - SKP shall Register students for evaluation the Skill Modules, who have
acquired skills on their own.
3. The Second Party agrees that the following responsibilities shall be undertaken by the <Name of the
Institution> Academic Training centres:
a. The <Name of the Institution> Academic centres shall plan the Vocational Education Programme(s) to be
offered in the Academic Year concerned and inform the <Name of the SKP>- SKP’s about the same at
least two months prior to the date of commencement of theProgramme (s).
b. | The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall announce and inform through its prospectus and
information on its Web site, the Vocational Education Programme(s) it plans to offer in the Academic
Year concerned for the information of the prospective students and invite applications for admission from
interested candidates at least two months prior to the date of commencement of the Programme(s).
c. The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall follow the admission norms of AICTE and the State
Govt. concerned. The admission shall be made strictly on the merits. The <Name of the Institution> -
Academic Centre will then upload the names and details of the selected students on AICTE Web-Portal.
d. The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will have their right to collect Fee from the students
towards:
° Registration
° Course/ Skill conduct
° Evaluation of the Academic/ Skill portion of each Level of the Programme. A portion of the Fee as
agreed upon by the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre and the <Name of the SKP>
— SKP’s shall be turned over to the <Name of the SKP> -SKP’s.
e. The <Name of Institution> Academic Centre will send to the <Name of the SKP> - SKP the Level- wise
nd Sector-wise lists of students registered for Vocational Education Programme(s) in the Sectors.
Q
The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will conduct appropriate Classes for the Academic content
of the Curriculum of the Vocational Education Programme(s) so as to complete the Academic portion within
prescribed time.
g- The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will conduct final examinations and evaluate the students
for the Academic portion of the Programme(s) as per the rules and regulations of the Technical Board or
University as the case may be.
h. After receiving a ‘Statement of Credits for the Vocational/Skill portion of the students from the<Name
of SKP> - SKP the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will send the combined Academic and
Vocational/Skill portion credits of the students to the Technical Board or University as the case may be.
i. Wherever such provisions are made by the Technical Board or the University, as the case may be, the
208
--- Page 225 ---
Approval Process Handbook
<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will awarda’ Level Certificate’ to the student who has
successfully completed both the Academic and the Vocational/Skill portions of the particular Level.
The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall maintaina record of the registered students and
Certificates issued and upload the same on AICTE Web-Portal.
k. = The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall submit details of students registered, evaluation
conducted and results to the Technical Board or the University, as the case may be, and also upload the
same on AICTE Web-Portal.
4. General:
Fee to be charged to students:
a. The Level wise Fee to be charged by the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will be informed
to the student by the <Name of Institution> Academic Centre as well as the <Name of the SKP> -
SKP before his/her registration for theProgramme;
b. | The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will collect from the student and retain with it self
the ‘Academic Portion Fee’ and the <Name of the SKP> - SKP will be given the ‘Vocational/Skill
Portion Fee’ by the <Name of the SKP> — Academic Centre;
c. | The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will collect the total Fee for the Programme from
the students and will transfer the ‘Vocational/Skill Portion Fee’ against the number of students to be
sent for training at least one month before the onset of training. Any delay in transferring the Fee
will entail interest @ <to be mutually decided by the Institution and SKP> calculated on the basis
of delay a number of days. After receiving the Fee <Name of the SKP> - SKP will issue Registration
cards to the students at least 7 days before the onset of training.
5. No Confidentiality:
There shall not be any confidentiality of any information disclosed by both parties to each other, either in
operationalizing this agreement or for the purposes of implement tingthis agreement. The information
sought under the Right to Information Act or otherwise by any student, shall be promptly made available.
6. — Effective Date:
This agreement is effective from the date signed by both the parties shall be valid for a period of three years until
determined, suspended or terminated earlier.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto, each acting under due and proper authority have executed this
mutually binding Memorandum of Understanding as of the date first written above..
For Institution: For <Name of the SKP>
Signed: Signed:
Name: Name:
Title: Title:
Date: Date:
Witnessed by:
Signature: Name:
Date:
Signature: Name:
Date: *Strike off whichever is not applicable
209
--- Page 226 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CERTIFICATE-|
Certificate of an Advocate
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Advocate)
il, Certificate of an Advocate
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Advocate)
The copies of <Trust/ Society/ Company> registration documents, Land documents, Land use Certificate,
Land Conversion Certificate in respect of application submitted by <Name and address of the Applicant>
who is an Applicant for establishment of new Technical Institution offering Technical Education Programme(s)
were provided to me by<Name and address of the Applicant> for verification regarding their authenticity and
appropriateness.
A. Trust/ Society/ Company Registration Documents:
Registration Certificate No.
Date of Registration
Registered at
Registered under the Act
1. | have verified the above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration documents from the Office
of <Competent Authority>.
2. The above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration documents are/ are not registered at the
Office of <Competent Authority>.
3. The above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration Documents are/ are not authentic.
B. Land Documents:
| hereby certify that:
1. | have verified the above-mentioned Land documents from the Sub Registrar Office<place>.
2. The above-mentioned Land documents are registered at the Sub Registrar Office<place>
3. The above-mentioned Land documents are authentic.
4, The above-mentioned Land documents are in the name of the Applicant.
5. The title of the Land pertaining to the above-mentioned Land documents are clear.
6. The Applicant is in Lawful possession of the Land pertaining to the above-mentioned Land documents.
Cc. Land Use Certificate:
Letter No.
Letter dated
Issued by
Extent of Land (in acre)
210
--- Page 227 ---
Approval Process Handbook
| hereby certify that:
1.
The Competent Authority has issued the Land Use Certificate in respect of Land under reference for
the proposed Institution mentioned above is.....
2. It has been approved by the Competent Authority.
Oh | verified the above-mentioned Land use Certificate from the Office of<Competent Authority>.
4. The above-mentioned Land Use Certificate is authentic.
5. It has been issued for the full extent of Land.
D. Land Conversion Certificate:
Letter No.
Letter dated
Issued by
Extent of Land (in acre)
| hereby certify that:
1.
The Competent Authority has issued the Land Conversion Certificate respect of Land under reference
for the proposed Institution mentioned above is.....
2. It has been approved by the Competent Authority.
3. | verified the above-mentioned Land Conversion Certificate from the Office of <Competent
Authority>.
4. The above-mentioned Land Conversion Certificate isauthentic.
5. It has been issued for the full extent ofLand.
E. Land Classification Certificate:
Letter No.
Letter dated
Issued by
Land Classification
| hereby certify that:
1.
Date:
Place:
The Competent Authority has issued the Land Classification Certificate respect of Land under
reference for the proposed Institution mentioned above is.....
It has been approved by the Competent Authority.
| verified the above-mentioned Land Classification Certificate from the Office of <Competent
Authority>.
The above-mentioned Land Classification Certificate is authentic.
It has been issued for the full extent of Land.
Signature of the Advocate
Name of the Advocate ..... RegistrationNo. .....
Practicing at .....
Seal/ Stamp of the Advocate
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
211
--- Page 228 ---
Approval Process Handbook
CERTIFICATE-2
Certificate of an Architect Registered with Council of Architecture
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Architect)
The copies of the approved Site Plan and Building Plans in respect of application submitted by <Name and address
of the Applicant> who is an Applicant for establishment of new Technical Institution<Name of the Institutions> at
<address> were provided to me by <Name and address of the Applicant>for verification regarding their authenticity
and appropriateness.
Details of Site Plan and Building Plans
Plans approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval
hereby certify that:
1. The Competent Authority has approved the site Plan and Building Plans of an Educational Institution
at the proposed site mentioned above is.....
2. | have verified the above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans from the Office of <Competent
Authority>.
3. The above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans have been approved by the Competent Authority.
4. The above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans are authentic.
5. Construction of Building admeasuring with the following details has been completed in all respects as
per the approved Building Plan.
Details of the Occupancy/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D
Certificate approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval
Structural Stability Certificate
Certificate approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval
| hereby certify that:
1. The Competent Authority has approved the Occupancy/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form
D and the Structural Stability Certificate, if applicable, mentioned above is.....
2. have verified the above-mentioned Certificates from the Office of <Competent Authority>.
3. The above-mentioned Certificates have been approved by the Competent Authority.
4. The above-mentioned Certificates areauthentic.
Signature of the Advocate
Name of the Advocate ..... RegistrationNo. .....
Date:
Places Seal/ Stamp of the Architect
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
212
--- Page 229 ---
CERTIFICATE-3
Certificate of the Bank Manager where the Applicant has a
Bank Account
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Bank duly signed by the
Bank Manager)
The copies of documents pertaining to the funds position (operational) i.e. the bank statement and/ or Fixed Deposit
Receipts in respect of application submitted by<Name and address of the Applicant>who is an Applicant for
establishment of new Technical Institution<Name of the Institution>at<address>) were provided to me by <Name
and address of the Applicant>for verification regarding their authenticity and appropriateness.
A. Bank Statement
Name of the Account Holder
Account Number
Name and Address of the Bank
It is certified that,
i. | verified the above-mentioned bank account from the records of <Name and address of bank>.
ii. The above-mentioned bank account is in the Name of.....
iii. The above-mentioned bank account is/ is not authentic.
iv. The balance in the above-mentioned bank account as on today, i.e. <dd/ mm/ yyyy>is Rs...
B. Fixed Deposits
Total Amount
It is certified that,
1. | have verified the above-mentioned operational fund FDRs from our Branch/Bank.
2. The above-mentioned FDRs are/ are not in the name of the Applicant under reference mentioned
above.
3. The above-mentioned FDRs are/ are not authentic.
4. There are no loans or mortgage of FDRs
Signature of the Bank Manager
Name of the Bank Manager
Date:
Place:
Seal/ Stamp of the Bank Manager
*Strike off whichever is not applicable
213
--- Page 230 ---
Approval Process Handbook
214
--- Page 231 ---
Brihadisvara [emple
(Built by Rajaraja Chola I, 1003-1010 CE)
No binding material was used for building Brihadisvara temple.
This 216 feet tall temple was built only by interlocking stones.
The Shikara of the temple rests on a single block of granite,
weighing 80 tons.
SONG
[e)
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Nelson Mandela Marg, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi, Delhi 10070
@eorficiaaicte — @AICTE_India ()/MediaAICTE {{})/Company/aicteindia
www.aicte-india.org