--- Page 1 ---
APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
aka AR dHatcht ren wae
[a C28 ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR
een icine 4 Pe TECHNICAL EDUCATION
--- Page 2 ---
This Handbook is a Legal Document as per
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987)
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Mandatory Accreditation of all Programmes/
Courses in Technical Education Institution and University Departments and Institutions
Deemed to be Universities imparting Technical Education) Regulations, 2014 Notified on
29" January, 2014
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approval for conducting Vocational
Education Programme, Community College Course(s) and Skill Knowledge Provider under
National Skill Qualification Framework) Regulations, 2012 Notified on 5 December, 2012
and amended on 3" February, 2016
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Norms and Standards for the Conduct of Post
Graduate Diploma in Management) Regulations, 2017 Notified on 14" December, 2017
and
UGC (Categorisation of Universities (Only) for Grant of Graded Autonomy) Regulations,
2018 Notified on 12" February, 2018
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Categorisation of Standalone Institutions (Sls) for
Grant of Graded Autonomy) Guidelines, 2019 Notified on 10" October, 2019
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approvals for Technical Institutions)
Regulations, 2020 Notified on 4" February, 2020 and amended on 24" February 2021
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Open and Distance Learning Education & Online
Education) Guidelines, 2021 Notified on 3 March, 2021 and amended on 13* April, 2021
and
All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/Staff Member)
Regulations, 2021 vide F.No.1-103/ AICTE / PGRC / Regulation / 2021 Notified on
25' March, 2021
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 3 ---
FOREWORD
Knowledge is the true organ of sight, not the eyes.
—The Panchatantra
The eyes can take picture of things we see, and project it to the mind. However, it is our brain /
mind that effectively let us know what we are seeing. | believe that this quote of Panchatantra
is suggesting that eyes are just the facilitators. Similarly, this Approval Process Handbook (APH)
acts as a facilitating tool to get the insight of policies, norms and regulations for the Technical
Institutions.
In this handbook, you'll find a wealth of information not only on the procedure for establishment
of Technical Institute but also on running the established Technical Institute. This book will
deepen your knowledge as a stakeholder.
In any country, Productivity is the main long-term propeller of economic growth and Technology-
enabled innovation is the major spur to productivity. And the Technical Institutions provides
knowledge, opportunities and ecosystem for innovations to the students. Therefore, the Technical
Institutions play a very vital role in the growth and development of the Nation.
The present era is witnessing technology disruption like Block chain, 5G Connection, Digital Twin,
Robotic Process Automation etc and the present Technology disruptive innovation enabler in
Artificial Intelligence. Soon we all will be witnessing a paradigm shift in the technology where the
devices will be talking with us just like our friend.
To catch up pace with the world, | request all the Universities to structure the curriculum of the
courses in tune with the present requirements / needs of the nation and the world. This year,
AICTE has made provision wherein any subject can be taught as a minor in combination with
other course at all levels. | request to you all that the student should be given a genuine choice
with the flexibility of choosing the minor subject. The Universities have to create this kind of
workable and genuine system offering an array of formats of courses.
Moving further, Young people are growing up in a complex world of online and offline, wherein
their lives get intermixed. In this environment, the Institutes has the responsibility to guide
the students the measures for to be safe and healthy and to manage effectively the academic,
personal and social lives. Institutes has to make provision for counsellors so that the students
are not exhausted mentally. Institutes should take this as on priority. Accordingly, from this year,
AICTE has added this provision under the essential requirement- hiring counsellors for seeking
help and guidance w.r.t psychological counselling related to Mental Health for Students, faculty
and non-teaching faculty.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 4 ---
The another major changes that were presented in this handbook is regarding relaxing the
norms of establishment of Technical Institution. The moratorium clauses have been relaxed.
The interested nonprofit Society / Trust or Company under section 8 can establish the Technical
Institution across India in Engineering and Technology Program. Further, the land requirements
at rural and semi-urban areas has been relaxed for the existing as well as new Institutions.
AICTE will be pro-facilitator in the Higher Education Sector. We all should be prepared in devising
a platform for the younger generation to hone their skills as required skill set is changing with
evolving different career paths.
At last, | appreciate Planning and Policy Division and Approval Bureau for bringing these policy
changes in this Approval Process Handbook and in an implementable way.
are erftrean dftcatavoid & fererar 1
(The offering of food is great; the offering of education is even greater. While food satisfies
only momentarily, education satisfies during the entire course of life).
(Prof. T. G. Sitharam)
Chairman, AICTE
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 5 ---
INDEX
Chapter Contents Page No.
Abbreviations i-iv
Definitions v-viii
| Grant of Approval through online application for Setting up a New Technical Institution] 01-11
offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/Post Graduate Degree Level
Il Grant of Approval through the online application for the following: 12-41
e Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
e I|ntroduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
e Change of Site/Location
e¢ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
e To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions
e Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the
same Campus or Same City
e Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding
Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
e = Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
e Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa
e Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)
e Introduction of Integrated/Dual Course
e Closure of the Institution
e = Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management
e Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in
Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)
e Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type of
Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)
e Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
e Change in Bank Details
e Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
e Extended EoA
Hl Grant of Approval for Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Indian and| 42-45
Foreign University/ Institution in the field of Technical Education, Research and Training
IV Grant of Approval through online application for the University/ Institutions Deemed| 46-53
to be University.
Vv Grant of Approval for Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities] 54-64
through the online application for Open and Distance Learning Education and online
Education
Vi Grant of Approval through online application for Vocational Education Courses under | 65-66
NSQF
Vil Norms and Requirements 67-79
Vill Penal Action in case of Violations of the Regulations/ Approval Process Handbook 80-85
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 6 ---
Contents
Appendices
S.No.
Description
Norms for Duration and Entry Level Qualifications and Statutory Reservations of
the Technical Programmes
Approved Nomenclature of Courses
Norms for Intake and Number of Courses/ Divisions in a new Technical Institution
Norms for Land and Built-up Area requirements of the Technical Institutions
Wm} BR] WIN
Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software, Internet, Printers and
Laboratory Equipment of the Technical Institutions
Norms for Essential and Desirable requirements of the Technical Institutions
Norms for Faculty requirements and Cadre Ratio of the Technical Institutions
Faculty Cadre and Qualifications
Norms for PGCM/ PGDM Courses
Subscription of Journals
BIlSlele}njoa
Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the establishment of a new Technical
Institution
Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging
Structure of Various Committees
Regional Offices of AICTE
Grievance Redressal Mechanism for Students and Faculty
AlniHRiWl] rN
Documents to be submitted for Setting up a new Technical Institution offering
a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level
Documents to be Submitted/ Uploaded for
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
Change of Site/Location
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions
Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in
the same Campus or Same City
e Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
e —Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa
Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)
Introduction of Integrated/Dual Course/ Extended EoA
Closure of the Institution
Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in
Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)
e Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)
e Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
e Change in Bank Details
e Change in the Name/ Address of the Trust/ Society/ Company
e¢ Collaboration and Twinning Programme
eoeeeee
Recommended Composition of the Board of Governors of the Technical
Institutions
19
Academic Calendar
20
Fellow Programme in Management: Conduct and Admission Procedure
URL
Link
https://www.aicte-india.org/bureaus/regulation
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 7 ---
Contents
Affidavits
Contents
Certificates
Contents
Formats
Contents
Annexures
S.No. Description
1__|Format for Forgotten Password
2 |Format for the applications submitted under Chapter I/ II/ IV except Closure of the
Institution
3 | Format for the establishment of a new Technical Institution while submitting the
Security Deposit
4 _|Format for the Progressive/ Complete Closure of the Institution
5 |Format for Category I/ II Universities notified by the UGC for the compliance of
AICTE norms
6__| Format for the release of Security Deposit
7 |Format of the Joint Affidavit by the Lessor and Lessee for transfer of private
Property/ Building under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
8 | Format for Additional Course(s) / Increase in Intake
9 [Format for Change in the Name of the Bank
10__| Format for Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company
11 | Format for Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Foreign University/
Institution OR Institute of National Importance /Eminence of India and AICTE
Approved Institution
12_| Format for conducting Academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body
13 | Format for conducting Open and Distance Learning & Online Courses
S.No. Description
1 |Certificate of an Advocate
2__| Certificate of an Architect registered with Council of Architecture
3 | Certificate of the Bank Manager where the Applicant has a Bank Account
S.No. Description
1__|No Objection Certificate from State Government/ UT
2__|No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board
3__| Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company
4  |MoU to be signed between the Institution and Skill Knowledge Providers/Trainers
S.No. Description
1 |Recommended Short and Medium Term Perspectives for Engineering Education
in India by the Committee to provide National Perspective Plan
2 _|List of Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts
3 |Closest Available Nomenclature of Under Graduate Degrees for the Diploma in
Engineering and Technology
4 |Closest Available Nomenclature of Diploma for the Under Graduate Degree in
Engineering and Technology
5 _| Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical Institution
6 | Major Disciplines, their Corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch
of Under Graduate Degree in Engineering and Technology
7 |Major Disciplines, their Corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch
of Diploma in Engineering and Technology
8 | State wise Competent Authorities to issue Certificates with respect to the Land/
Building
9 | Guidelines for the appointment of Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Persons from
Industry in AICTE approved Technical Institutions
10 _|Mandatory Disclosures
11 | Format of the Undertaking to be submitted by the Applicant on Institute /
University Letter head for Student Induction Program, Examination reforms &
Internship Policy
12 |Land Requirement as specified in the Approval Process Handbook Norms during
the Previous Years
13 |Documents to be submitted to the Scrutiny Committee/ Expert Visit Committee
4_|MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV)
15__|Ready Reckoner for Frequent Queries
URL
Link
https://www.aicte-india.org/bureaus/regulation
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 8 ---
ACA Access and Circulation Area
ADF AICTE Doctoral Fellowship
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education
AlU Association of Indian Universities
ATAL AICTE Training and Learning Academy
ATMA Association of Indian Management Schools (AIMS) Test For Management Admission
APH Approval Process Handbook
ARIIA Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements
BCA Bachelor of Computer Application
B. Des. Bachelor of Design
B.E. Bachelor of Engineering
B. HMCT Bachelor of Hotel Management and Catering Technology
BoG Board of Governors
BoM Board of Management
BOT Built Operate and Transfer
B. Sc Bachelor of Science
B.Tech Bachelor of Technology
B. Voc Bachelor of Vocation
CABE Central Advisory Board of Education
CAT Common Admission Test
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education
CCTV Closed Circuit Television
CMAT Common Management Admission Test
CPWD Central Public Works Department
DELNET Developing Library Network
DDA Delhi Development Authority
DME Directorate of Medical Education
DPR Detailed Project Report
DSC Digital Signature Certificate
DTE Directorate of Technical Education
D. Skill Diploma of Skill
D.Voc Diploma of Vocation
EC Executive Committee of AICTE
EoA Extension of Approval
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning
EVC Expert Visit Committee
EWS Economically Weaker Section
FAR Floor Area Ratio
FDR Fixed Deposit Receipt
FPM Fellow Programme in Management
FSI Floor Space Index
GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
GMAT Graduate Management Aptitude Test
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 i
--- Page 9 ---
Gol
Government of India
GPAT Graduate Pharmacy Aptitude Test
GPS Global Positioning System
HEI Higher Educational Institute
HMCT Hotel Management and Catering Technology
CCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations
EV Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development
KS Indian Knowledge System
oT Internet of Things
IIM Indian Institute of Management
ISc Indian Institute of Science
IT Indian Institute of Technology
J&K Jammu & Kashmir
LCD Liquid Crystal Display
LMS Learning Management System
LoA Letter of Approval
Lol Letter of Intent
LoR Letter of Rejection
LWE Left Wing Extremism
MAT Management Aptitude Test
MBA Master of Business Administration
Mbps Megabits per Second
MCA Master of Computer Application
M. Des Master of Design
M.E Master of Engineering
M. HMCT Master of Hotel Management and Catering Technology
MMS Master of Management Studies
MoA Memorandum of Association
MODROBS__| Modernization and Removal of Obsolescence Scheme
MoE Ministry of Education
MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses
MoU Memorandum of Understanding
M.Pharm — | Master of Pharmacy
M. Tech Master of Technology
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council
NAD National Academic Depository
NATA National Aptitude Test in Architecture
NATS National Apprenticeship Training Scheme
NBA National Board of Accreditation
NBC National Building Code
NBCC National Buildings Construction Corporation
NDL National Digital Library of India
NEP National Education Policy
NEAT National Education Alliance for Technology
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 10 ---
NEQIP North East Quality Improvement Programme
NHEQF National Higher Education Qualification Framework
NIRF National Institutional Ranking Framework
NIT National Institute of Technology
NITTTR National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research
NMAT National Management Aptitude Test
NOC No Objection Certificate
NPTEL National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning
NRI Non Resident Indian
NSDA National Skill Development Agency
NTA National Testing Agency
ocl Overseas Citizen of India
PC Personal Computer
PF Provident Fund
PG Post Graduate
PGCM Post Graduate Certificate in Management
PGDBM Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management
PGDCA Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application
PGDM Post Graduate Diploma in Management
PGRC Public Grievance Redressal Cell
Ph. D Doctor of Philosophy
PMKVY Pradhan MantriKaushalVikasYojana
PMSSS Prime Minister's Special Scholarship Scheme
PPP Public Private Partnership
PwBD Persons with Benchmark Disabilities
QP Qualification Packs
Qs* Quacquarelli Symonds
R&D Research and Development
RBI Reserve Bank of India
RC Regional Committee
RF Radio Frequency
RO Regional Office
RPGF Refundable Performance Guaranty Fund
RPS Research Promotion Schemes
SAC Standing Appellate Committee
SAGY SaansadAdarsh Gram Yojana
SAMVAY Skills Assessment Matrix for Vocational Advancement of Youth
SCSC Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee
sD Security Deposit
SEE Sustainable Energy Engineering
SHC Standing Hearing Committee
SIH Singapore India Hackathon
SKP Skill Knowledge Providers/ Trainers
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds
AICTE &4s=79 APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 11 ---
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds DTH Channels
PRABHA
TDS Tax Deduction at Source
TELNET Terminal Emulation Programme for TCP/ IP Networks
TER Technical Education Regulatory
TFW Tuition Fee Waiver
THE Rank =| Times Higher Education Ranking
UA Urban Agglomeration
UG Under Graduate
UGC University Grants Commission
UHV Universal Human Values
UT Union Territory
Wi-Fi Wireless Fidelity
XAT Xavier's Aptitude Test
* British company specialising in the analysis of higher education institutions around the world.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 12 ---
1 |"Academic Year” means academic activities of the concerned affiliating University/ Board/Technical
Institution in a Year (Odd Semester followed by Even Semester).
2 |“Act” means the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987).
3 |“Adjunct Faculty” means resource person as per the guidelines given in Annexure 9 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
4 |"“Advocate” means an Advocate registered with the Bar Council of India.
5 |“Affidavit” is a written sworn statement of fact voluntarily made by a deponent under an oath or
affirmation administered by a person authorized to do so by Law. Such statement is witnessed as to the
authenticity of the deponent's signature by a taker of oaths, such as: a Notary Public or Commissioner
of Oaths.
6 |“AICTE Web-Portal” means the website hosted by the Council at URL www.aicte-india.org.
7 |"Applicant” is the one who makes an application to the Council for seeking any kind of approval under
these Regulations.
8 |“Approval Process Handbook (APH)’is a Handbook published by AICTE, prescribing norms and
procedures for processing of applications submitted for grant of various approvals from time to time.
9 |“Approved Institution” means an Institution offering Technical Programmes approved by the Council.
10 |“Approved Intake” means the maximum number of students that can be admitted in a Course (excluding
the Supernumerary Seats) as approved by the Council.
11 |“Architect” means an Architect registered with the Council of Architecture established under the
Architects Act, 1972.
12 |"Autonomous Institution” means an Institution to which autonomy is granted by UGC and is designated
to be so by the Statutes of affiliating University/ Board or by AICTE to Standalone Institutions.
13 |“Bandwidth Contention” means the contention ratio, the ratio of the potential maximum demand to
the actual bandwidth.
14 |"Break in EoA” means break in obtaining Extension of Approval by an Institution on their-own in the
previous year(s).
15 |“Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT)” means a project financing, wherein a private entity Receives a concession
from the public sector to finance, design, construct and operate Facility stated in the concession
contract.
16 |“Chairman” means the Chairman of AICTE as described under sub-section 4(a) of Section 3 of the Act.
17 |“Co-ed Institution” means the Institution admitting male, female and transgender students.
18 |“Commission” means the University Grants Commission established under Section 4 of the UGC Act,
1956.
19 |“Company” means a Company established/ registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.
20 | “Competent Authority for Admission “means an Organization that has ,the legally delegated authority,
capacity, or power to do admission to Technical Institutions in the State Government/ UT concerned.
21 |“Compliance Report” means the Report submitted by the Technical Institution complying with the
requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the deficiencies observed by Expert
Visit Committee/issues mentioned in the Show Cause Notice/Speaking Order.
22 |“Constituent College” means an Institution/ Department/ College/ School which forms a Part of the
University.
23 | “Contractual Faculty” means a resource person as per the guidelines given in Chapter VII of the Approval
Process Handbook
24 |“Council” means All India Council for Technical Education established under Section 3 of The AICTE Act.
25 |“Course” means one of the branches of learning in a Programme such as Civil Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, etc.
AICTE & =< APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 v
--- Page 13 ---
26
“Division” means
A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) or Thirty (30) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses
in Engineering and Technology, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in Hotel
Management and Catering Technology/ Post Graduate Courses in MCA/ PGDM/ MBA Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in Planning
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Applied
Arts and Crafts Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Design
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ Abatch of a maximum of Thirty (30) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology/
Planning/ Applied Arts and Crafts/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ A batch of a maximum of Fifteen (15) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Design Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
+ A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Integrated Degree Courses in Engineering and
Technology/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA Programme and Integrated
Degree Course in MBA Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;
A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in an Integrated Degree Course in Planning Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any; and
A maximum of Twenty (20) seats per year in Fellow Programme in Management Programme.
27
“EoA” means Extension of Approval granted by AICTE for the conduct of Technical Programme(s)/
Course(s) to an Institution for that Academic Year.
“Extended EoA” means Extension of Approval granted by AICTE for the conduct of Technical
Programme(s)/ Course(s) to an Institution for more than one Academic Year.
28
“Executive Committee” means the Committee constituted by the Council under Section 12 of AICTE Act.
29
“Expert Visit Committee (EVC)” means the Committee constituted by the Regional Officer as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to verify offline/ online the availability of
Infrastructural facilities of an Institution.
30
“Faculty member” means an individual qualified as per AICTE Regulations, working on Full Time basis in
an Institution/ University.
31 | “Foreign National”means the Citizen of the Countries other than India who are not of Indian origin as
defined under OCI.
32 |“Government aided Institution” means a Technical Institution that meets 50% or more of its recurring
expenditure out of the grant received from Government or Government Organizations.
33 |“Government Institution” means Technical Institution established and/ or fully maintained by the
Government.
34 | “Head of the Institution” means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a University or an Institution Deemed to be
University, the Principal/Director/such other designation as the Administrative Head of the Institution
of the Technical Institution referred.
35 | “Honours” means degree awarded by a University as per its prevalent norms
36 | “Institution Deemed to be University” means an Institution for Higher Education so declared, on the
recommendation of the Commission, by the Central Government under Section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956.
37 |“Lateral Entry” means admission of students into the second year of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree
Courses as per Chapter VII of the Approval Process Handbook.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 vi
--- Page 14 ---
38
“Level” means Diploma, Post Diploma Certificate, Under Graduate Degree, Post Graduate Diploma and
Post Graduate Degree Programmes
39
“Minority Institution” means an Educational Institution established and administered by a minority
Trust/Society/Company and recognized by Competent Authority as Minority Institution up to the
duration specified.
40
“NBA” means the National Board of Accreditation, an autonomous body initially set up by AICTE,
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
41
“Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” means an Indian Citizen who is ordinarily residing outside India and holds
an Indian Passport.
42
“Open and Distance Learning (ODL)” mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities
by overcoming separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print, electronic,
MOOCs, online and occasional interactive face-to-face meetings arranged by an Institution through
Learner Support Services to deliver teaching-learning experience, including practical or work experience.
43
Online Learning (OL) mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities by overcoming
separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print ,electronic, MOOCs in a
totally Online mode
44
“Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)” means a Foreign national, who was eligible to become Citizen of India
on 26.01.1950 or was a Citizen of India on or at any-time after 26.01.1950 or belonged to a territory that
became part of India after 15.08.1947. Minor children of such person are also eligible for OCI. However,
if the Applicant had ever been a Citizen of Pakistan or Bangladesh, he/ she will not be eligible for OCI.
45
“Private University” means a University duly established through a State/Central Act by a sponsoring
body viz., a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860, or any other corresponding
Law for the time being in force in a State or a Public Trust or a Company registered under Section 8 of
the Companies Act, 2013.
46
“Programme” means the field of Technical Education, i.e. Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy,
Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts and Crafts, Design, Hotel Management and Catering Technology,
MCA, Management (PGCM/PGDM/MBA) and such other Programmes/ areas as notified by the Act.
47
“Public Private Partnership (PPP)” means a Partnership based on a contract or concession Agreement,
between a Government or Statutory entity on the one side and a Private Sector enterprise on the other
side.
48
“Regular Courses” means the Courses offered in the timings of Regular Shift, First Shift, Second Shift
and Part Time shall be considered as Regular Courses. The Institutions shall have to fulfil all facilities
suchas Infrastructure, Faculty and other requirements to offer the Regular Courses as per the
norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the Total Approved Intake and the
Institutions may conduct the Courses in the timings of Regular Shift, First Shift, Second Shift
and Part Time not exceeding the “Approved Intake” of each Course, as per the convenience
of all stakeholders.
49
“Restoration of Intake” means restoring back to the “Approved Intake’of the Institution that was existing
prior to any penal action.
50
“Self-Financing Institution” means an Institution started by a Trust/ Society/ Section 8 Company and
does not receive grant/fund from Central/ State Government/ UT for meeting its recurring expenditure.
51
“Society” means a Society registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
52
“Standalone Institutions” means those Institutions which are not affiliated to any of the University/
Board, but are imparting education by means of conducting regular Courses leading to Diploma/Post
Diploma Certificate/Post Graduate Certificate/Post Graduate Diploma Levels in Management, Travel
and Tourism, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Computer Applications and Design.
53
“Standing Appellate Committee (SAC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for considering the appeals of the Technical
Institutions.
54
“Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman
as per the composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the Scrutiny of Complaints
received against the Technical Institutions.
AICTE &4s=79 APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 vii
--- Page 15 ---
55
“Standing Hearing Committee (SHC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to review the Reports of Expert Visit
Committee/ replies received for Show Cause Notices.
56
“State Level Fee Committee” means a Committee notified by the concerned State Government/ UT for
Regulation of Fee to be charged by the Technical Institutions.
57
“Supernumerary seats” means Intake over and above the “Approved Intake” which includes TFW, OCI
/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries, Lateral Entry, PwBD, Kashmiri
Migrants and PMSSS seats notified from time to time.
58
“Technical Institution” means an Institution set up by the Government or Trust/ Society/ Company
for conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in the field of Technical Education, Training and Research in
Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design,
Hotel Management and Catering Technology, MCA, Management, and such other Programmes and
areas as notified by the Act.
59
“Total Approved Intake” includes Intake approved in all the Programme(s)/ Course(s) of an Institution.
60
“Trust” means a Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any
other relevant Acts.
61 | “University Department” means a Department established and maintained by the University.
62 | “University” means a University defined under the UGC Act, 1956.
63 | Any other word and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the All India Council for
Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987), shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the
said Act.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 xxvi
--- Page 16 ---
CHAPTER-I
New Institution
Grant of Approval for Setting up a New Technical Institution offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/
Post Diploma Certificate / Under Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree / Post
Graduate Certificate
1.1 Introduction
a. The New Technical Institution shall be established by providing Infrastructure and other
requirements as per the norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
b. New Technical Institution offering Technical Course(s) / Programme(s) shall not be established
without prior approval of the Council.
fe; Admission Authority/ Body/ Institution shall not admit students to any Technical Programme
of an Institution, which do not have requisite prior approval of the Council.
d. The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central,
State and Local Laws and norms of other Regulatory Bodies also, if applicable.
e. State Government / UT is providing financial assistance for establishment of Technical
institutions in order to offer the Engineering and Technology Programme / Courses at
DIPLOMA/UG/PG level. The Government must have budget provision of minimum 100 lakh
and requisite land for establishment of new institute.
f. Applicants whose application were rejected and issued Final LoR in the previous academic year
2022 - 23.
1.2. Time Schedule for Processing of the Applications
a.
AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE Website
from time to time, inviting applications with cut off dates for various categories and processing
thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/AICTE Website shall be final and
binding. To grant approval for establishment of a Technical Institution, online application on
AICTE Web Portal through National Single Window System (NSWS) is mandatory. Applications
submitted offline shall NOT be accepted.
The submission of an application on AICTE Web Portal and payment shall not be later than the
last date as notified in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website.
1.3. Application for Seeking Approval of the Council
1.3.1
1.3.2
For Setting up a New Technical Institution proposed to offer a Programme in
a. Engineering and Technology / Planning / Applied Arts and Crafts / Design/ Hotel
Management and Catering Technology (Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Level)
b. Computer Application (MCA)
c. Management (Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree
Level)
Eligibility of the Promoter
a. A Society, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/
Secretary of Society;
OR
b. ATrust, registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any
other relevant Acts through the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust;
OR
c. ACompany established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013;
OR
. _Central/ State Government/ UT Administration or by a Society/ Trust registered with them.
e. The above bodies shall apply individually or under Public Private Partnership (PPP)/
Build- Operate-Transfer (BOT) mode through an Officer authorized by Central/ State
Government/UT.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 01
--- Page 17 ---
1.3.3
1.3.4
1.35
f.
A Company having any foreign equity directly or indirectly as shareholding shall NOT be
permitted to apply for setting up a Technical Institution (with exceptions provided by the
Government).
New Institutions are NOT eligible to apply for the Introduction of NRI / OCI / FN / Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries/ Twinning/ Fellow Programs.
Institutions applying under various Schemes of MoE:
a.
MoE / Directorate General of Training, Government of India for the promotion of Technical
Education in un-served/ underserved Districts across the Country has initiated the Scheme
of “Sub-Mission on Polytechnics” for the opening of Polytechnics by the respective State
Government/ UT. The scheme shall be applicable to the Districts where no Polytechnics
are already available. If any of the mentioned Districts are carved out administratively,
then those carved out Districts shall also be considered under the Sub-Mission Scheme.
Policy initiatives have been taken by MoE, to establish a Technical Institution by the
respective State Government/ UT in “Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts/
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected” as notified by the Central Government from
time to time (or) in a District where there is NO Technical Institution. The list of
Districts identified as Higher Educationally Backward (Aspirational)Districts is given in
Annexure 2 of the Approval Process Handbook. If any of the mentioned Districts are
carved out administratively, then those carved out Districts shall also be considered under
the Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts/ Left Wing Extremism Scheme.
The concerned State Government/ UT, seeking approval of AICTE for these Institutions
under the above mentioned schemes is required to apply individually online on AICTE
Web-Portal. Applications shall be processed by way of obtaining an undertaking from the
Chief Secretary of the respective State Government/ UT that the Land has been transferred
in the name of the proposed Institutions, sufficient funds have been allotted to start the
construction of the permanent Campus and that these proposed Institution(s) are being
established in the respective State/UT under the abovementioned Schemes initiated by
the MoE.
Such application shall be processed through Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee for the
proposed location. Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the
Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be forwarded to the Council and further to Executive
Committee (EC) for the grant of approval.
The Institutions shall function in a temporary Campus and shall move to their permanent
Campus within 2 years from the date of issue of the Letter of Approval (LoA). Further, AICTE
shall inspect such Institutions through Expert Visit Committee (EVC) to assess the status
of readiness of the State Government/ UT for operationalization of these Institutions in
the permanent Location as per the procedure for Change of Site/ Location. In case of the
Institutions not shifting to the permanent location even after 2 years and fulfilling the
norms of the Approval Process Handbook, the “Approved Intake” in the Course(s) shall be
reduced to 50%. Similarly, if an Institution has not shifted even after 4 years, the Council
shall take appropriate action.
The existing Institutions approved by other Regulatory Bodies, seeking approval for the first
time from AICTE for conducting Technical Programme(s):
a.
Offering Course(s) in Applied Arts and Crafts/ Vocational (Technical) Programme without
having approval from AICTE.
Non-Technical Institutions already running MBA/MCA courses without approval of AICTE
(for such Institutions, exclusive building and Director/Principal are not required. However,
the Institutions should fulfil all other norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook
such as separate Head of the Department, Faculty, Infrastructure, Built-up area, etc).
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 02
--- Page 18 ---
NOTE: In all the above cases, Institutions seeking approval for the first time from AICTE
shall submit an online application on AICTE web portal through NSWS as a New Technical
Institution for all their existing Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).
1.4 Submission of Application by the Promoter
1.4.1. Allotment of USER ID
a. Anunique USERID with password shall be allotted to each new application for setting up
of anew Technical Institution on payment of $5500/- (Rupees Five Thousand Five Hundred
Only), through the payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org
b. If any existing Institution has forgotten the Password, the Institution shall apply online
for a new password. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of %5500/- (Rupees
Five Thousand Five Hundred Only) shall be made through the payment gateway on
AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org. The proof of payment and an Affidavit 1 for
“Forgotten Password” shall be submitted to the Approval Bureau (AB). The Bureau shall
verify and upload on the Web-Portal and make necessary recommendations on the portal
for allotment of Password to the Applicants.
c. Using the USER ID, Online application in the prescribed Form shall be filled and submitted
on AICTE Web-Portal@ www.aicte-india.org and a unique identification number is allotted
to each application for further reference. The Applicant shall be able to track the status of
the application at various stages of processing using this unique identification number.
1.4.2. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges = in Lakh for Setting up a new Technical
Institution offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under
Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree are given below:
Type of Institution TER Charges
% in Lakh
i Minority Institution/Institution setup in J&K/Ladakh/North Eastern 6.60
States/Institution setup exclusively for Women/PwBD
ii Government/Government Aided Institutions/PPP mode Nil
iii All other Institutions 8.80
iv ALL Applicants under (i) and (iii) whose applications were rejected and 2.20
issued Final LoR in the last academic year**
** Not applicable for Applications, which were, rejected in the last academic year and TER Charges refunded
under Clauses 1.4.2 (g) and 1.4.7 (b) of this Chapter.
NOTE 1: Applicants under (iv) are not eligible for refund of TER Charges as per Clauses 1.4.2 (g) and 1.4.7 (b) of
this Chapter.
NOTE 2: 10% TER charges will be increased annually.
b. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee (including Court directions to any
type of Institutions) has to be conducted, then the Applicant has to remit %0.55 Lakh
through online as an additional TER Charges.
c.Inan extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee (Online /Offline)
has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the
Applicant has to remit =1.10 / $2.20 Lakh respectively through online as an additional TER
Charges.
d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
@ wwwaaicte-india.org within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be
considered.
e. Only those applications submitted within the cut-off date, including payment shall be
considered for processing.
f. In case of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be
refunded to the Applicant.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 03
--- Page 19 ---
15
1.4.3
1.4.4
1.4.5
1.4.6
1.4.7
g. Applications submitted under Clause 1.3.1 and 1.3.5, if rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision, the TER Charges after a deduction of
= 0.55 lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant/Institution.
h. Incase of rejection of an application submitted under Clause 1.5.2, if opted for the issue of
Extension of Approval of the existing Programme(s), refund shall be made after deducting
the applicable TER Charges.
All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited in their online application on AICTE
web portal @ www.aicte-india.org are correct. Facility to edit the data will be available until the
final submission of the application. After the final submission, the data entered is not allowed
for any further editing till the processing of the application is completed. Applicants shall
exercise utmost caution before pressing the “SUBMIT” tab. All the documents to be submitted
on online applications should be DIGITALLY SIGNED (using Digital Signature Certificate-DSC)
and submit on AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as notified in the Public Notice /
AICTE web-portal.
NOTE: Institutions shall NOT be Permitted to Submit Applications without DSC.
All Applicants shall submit an Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public
Notary or an Oath Commissioner on 7100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper (Digitally
Signed).In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, civil and/or criminal
as per the Regulations in place.
All the Applicants shall submit a copy of the application (as submitted on AICTE portal) to the
State Government/UT and affiliating University/ Board immediately and get a receipt with the
Official Seal from the authorized signatory for the same.
All the Applicants shall upload one set of documents as per Appendix 16 of APH (Digitally
Signed by Chairman /Secretary of the Trust /Society /Company) on AICTE web portal. Any
document uploaded on AICTE web portal without Digital Signature shall not be considered as
valid document.
NOTE: 1) In case of Government Institutions, all the documents to be uploaded on AICTE Web
portal shall be Digitally Signed by Director/Principal/Designated Officer Appointed for the
Approval purpose.
2) Online Applications complete in all respects (including processing fee, if applicable) shall
ONLY be processed as per the procedure defined in this Approval Process Handbook..
Views of State Government/ UT and affiliating University/Board
a. The State Government/ UT and the Affiliating University/ Board shall forward their views
on the application received by them to the Approval Bureauof AICTE NOT later than one
week from the last date specified for submission of application as per the Public Notice /
AICTE Web portal.
b. Based on the views (if any) of the State Government/ UT and the affiliating University/
Board for setting up of new Technical Institution, the Approval Bureau Shall take a
decision about the processing of application or to reject the same. If the application is
not processed further, the TER Charges after a deduction of = 0.55 Lakh (Rupees Fifty Five
Thousand Only) shall be refunded to the Applicant.
c. Intheabsence of the receipt of views from the State Government/ UT/ affiliating University/
Board on the application within the stipulated time, the Council shall proceed for further
processing.
Establishment of a New Technical Institution
Moratorium for establishing New Institution in Engineering and Technology has been lifted from AY
2023-24. However, for establishing a New Institution in Engineering and Technology, preference shall
be given to the applicant offering courses in multi-disciplinary area in-line with NEP 2020 in STEM areas.
1.5.1
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the Land / built-up area as required and
its Lawful possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company
on or before the date of submission of application.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 04
--- Page 20 ---
1.5.2
1.5.3
b. Requirements for Technical Institution shall be as per the norms specified in Chapter VII of
the Approval Process Handbook.
c. Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be
prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor
and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State
Government/ UT. However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects
as per the Infrastructure requirements.
d. The Head of the “Technical Institution” shall be named as the “Principal/ Director” having
qualifications as per AICTE norms as defined for Principal in a Programme of the Technical
Institution.
The existing Institution applied for Closure of the Institution are also eligible to apply for
starting a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same Academic year. Technical
Institutions applying under this Clause shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure
of the Institution for the existing Programme(s) and shall apply for a different Programme.
However, the Applicant has to make Material/ Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan,
Site Plan, etc. duly approved by the concerned Competent Authority (if applicable) to suit the
requirements of the new Programme.
a. In case of such application being approved, the existing Institution shall be considered
as CLOSED (Progressive/ Complete Closure, as applicable) and the liabilities, if any, arising
out of this, shall solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution.
b. In case of the application being rejected, the same shall be processed for the Closure
of the Institution/ issue of Extension of Approval as per the choice mentioned in the
application.
The fund position of the Applicant shall be in the form of FDRs and/ or Bank accounts in the
Nationalized Bank or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by Reserve Bank of India as
mentioned in the table,on the date of Scrutiny. However, for Government/ Government Aided
Institution/ Central/ State University, Government must have budget provision of minimum
=100 lakh and requisite land / built-up area for establishment of new institute.
SI. Programme proposed (Diploma/ Post Total minimum funds required as proof of
No. Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Operational Expenses at the time of Scrutiny in the
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree) Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company (% in Lakh)
i | Engineering and Technology 100
ii | Planning 50
iii | Applied Arts and Crafts 50
iv |Design 50
v_|Hotel Management and Catering Technology 50
vi |Computer Application (MCA) 50
vii | Management 50
1.5.4 The Applicants cannot use the name of Technical Institution in such a way that the abbreviated
form of name of the Technical Institution becomes IIM/IIT/IISc/NIT/ISER/IIT/IEST/AICTE/UGC/
MoE/Gol. The Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government/ India/ Indian/ National/
All India/ All India Council/ Commission in the name of the Technical Institution giving an
interpretation that it is a Govt. Institute while being a fully Private Institute and other names as
prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided
that the restrictions mentioned above shall not be applicable, if the Technical Institution is
established by the Government of India or its name is approved by the Government of India.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 05
--- Page 21 ---
1.6
135.5
1.5.6
hs/
1.5.8
Applicants shall NOT use the names of the existing Institutions within the State. The existing
Institutions having the same names run by the same/different Society/Trust/Company within
the State/UT shall at least add the name of the Village/Town/City where it is located as an
integral part of the name of the Institution.
All Institutions shall use the same font and size for the full name of the Institutions, wherever it
is displayed.
The Courses as per Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be opted for a new
Technical Institution at Diploma/Under Graduate / Post Graduate Level, a combination of
Diploma, Under Graduate and Post Graduate Levels may also be approved.The promoter may
apply for one or more programme(s).In case of Engineering and Technology at least THREE
core branches and one emerging area course shall be opted. However, the “Maximum Intake
allowed” for the Programmes shall be as per Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Security Deposit shall be calculated based on the summation of number of programme(s)/
levels applied.
Core branches: Agriculture Engineering, Automobile Engineering, Chemical Engineering,
Civil Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Electronics Engineering,
Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering, Food Technology, Industrial
Engineering, Instrumentation, Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgy, Mining Engineering
and Textile Engineering.
Emerging area courses: Microelectronics and VLSI, Smart Mobility, EV-Technology,
Transportation, Highway Engineering, Renewable Energy, Climate Change, Earth System
Sciences, 5G, Sustainable Development & Circular Economy, Waste Management, Product
Design, CRISPR Cas - 9, Artificial Intelligence (Al), Internet of Things (loT), Embedded SW,
Internet SW, Mobility, Analytics, Cloud Computing, Block Chain, Data Sciences, Cyber
Security, 3D Printing and Design, Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality (AR/VR), Quantum
Computing.
Procedure
a. The application shall be processed as per the Procedure of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ EVC as
per Clause 1.6/ 1.7 as applicable.
b. The application under existing Clause 1.5.2 of this Chapter shall be processed first
for Closure of the Institution by online/offline (as applicable) Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee, if found in order, then only the application shall be processed further for the
establishment of new Technical Institution following the respective procedures specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.
Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee:
a.
The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated by Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval Process Handbook by the Approval
Bureau by selection of committee members through the automated selection process on the
AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable
to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then Approval Bureau
with approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to pick another expert from the
approved panel of the experts from the portal.
The date and time for Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be informed by the Approval
Bureau to the institutes and the concerned experts.
The concerned Officer of the Council shall assist the Committee and place/share relevant
records and documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for the
conduct of the meetings; however, he/ she shall not be part of the Committee.
Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by Chairman / Secretary
of the trust) along with Self-Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the
supporting documents before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall present their application and ALL original documents along with self-attested
copies as per Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, before the Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain absent at the time
of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.
The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 06
--- Page 22 ---
1.7
Applicant as mentioned above and shall countersign (if verified offline) all the documents that
are accepted.
Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company throughAICTE Web-Portal.
Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny shall
be eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by theApproval
Bureau.
The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify ONLY the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
committee as per the norms and standards and shall countersign (If verified offline) all the
documents that are accepted.
Applications that are found to be in order in all respect by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny shall be
processed further for EVC.
The Approval Bureau shall ensure and certify that all fields of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee Report are filled completely.
Applicant shall submit one set of attested copies of original documents to the Approval Bureau,
produced during online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny committee.
Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee
a.
The Expert Visit Committee shall be constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval Process
Handbook by the Approval Bureau by selection of committee members through an automated
process in the AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Expert Visit Committee is
unable to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then Approval
Bureau with approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to pick another expert from
the approved panel of the experts from the portal. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify
Physically/ Online the infrastructural facilities of the institution.
Additional experts, if required, may also be co-opted in any of the Committee for processing of
applications, Complaints, etc.
An Expert Visit Committee shall visit Physically / Online the proposed premises of the Institution
to verify the following:
i. | Readiness with respect to Appendix 4 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Instructional,
Administrative and Amenities area requirements for the First Year of the Technical
Institution as per the Building Plan duly accepted and counter-signed by the Scrutiny/
Re- Scrutiny Committee members (in case of offline).
ii, | Readiness with respect to Appendix 5 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Computer,
Software, Internet, Printers, Laboratory Equipment, Books, Journals and Library facilities
of the Technical Institution.
iii. Readiness with respect to Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Essential
and Desirable requirements of the Technical Institution.
iv. Progress related to appointment of Principal/ Director and Faculty with respect to the
norms, standards and conditions prescribed by the Council.
The Approval Bureau shall make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the Expert Visit
Committee; however, concerned officer, Approval Bureau, AICTE shall not be a part of the
expert committee. Experts shall carry the Identity Card of their Organization.
The Expert Visit Committee shall have access to the Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee.
The Expert Visit Committee shall verify actual availability of Equipment as per the Curriculum
and Syllabus of the affiliating University/ Board and Computers, Software, Internet, Printers,
Book Titles, Book Volumes, subscription of National and International Journals and entry in
the Stock Registers as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The mere presentation of
Purchase Orders/ Payment records for subscription, etc. without the actual availability of items
shall not be considered.
The Expert Visit Committee shall also verify documents in original as mentioned in Appendix
16 of the Approval Process Handbook with respect to actual Infrastructure visited.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 07
--- Page 23 ---
1.8
1.9
Applicant shall submit one set of attested copies of original documents to the Approval Bureau,
produced during online Expert Visit Committee.
In case of online Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall prepare a video showcasing
all the infrastructural facilities for not less than 30 minutes and shall upload the same in the
Trust / Soceity website and share the link in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents
(as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be
uploaded on portal.
In case of offline Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall arrange for Video recording
(institution expense) with the date and time of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit
Committee. The institution shall upload the same in the Trust / Society Website and share
the link in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in
Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.
NOTE: The video recording with briefing by one of the Institute representative for not less
than 30 minutes shall cover the entry and exit of the Committee with time, the Building
Plan approved and signed by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, GPS Coordinates at the
entrance of the main Building, Class rooms, Laboratories, Workshops, Office Room, Barrier
free environment facilities such as ramp/ lift/ toilets, Library, Computer Centre, meeting with
Students and Faculty members (in case of existing Institutions), in addition to the recording
of other details. The Institute shall also arrange Laptop/Desktop with Internet facility, Scanner
and Printer to the Expert Visit Committee (only in offline mode)
The Expert Visit Committee shall submit the following to the Approval Bureau (If conducted in
offline mode)
1. Its visit Report in the prescribed format.
2. Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 16 of the
Approval Process Handbook
3. Confirmation regarding uploading of Video recording of the Expert Visit Committee in the
Trust / Soceity website and link on AICTE web portal.
4. Attendance sheet duly signed / authenticated by the members of the Expert Visit
Committee and representatives of Applicant Trust/ Society/Company present during
the visit.
The Approval Bureau shall ensure and certify that the Expert Visit Committee Report is complete
in all respect.
The scanning and uploading of the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee Report and Expert Visit
Committee Report shall be done by the Approval Bureau.
State Public, Private Universities and Central Universities are also not required to take AICTE
approval as per the AICTE Act. However, few of the Universities are seeking approval of AICTE for
availing the benefits of AICTE Schemes/Initiatives as per the prevailing policies/norms.
Grant of Approval
a.
The Executive Committee (EC) after considering the recommendations of the Committee and
views of the Approval Bureau shall take decision either to grant of approval or otherwise. The
decisions of the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.
The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form of
Letter of Approval (LoA) or Letter of Rejection (LOR). Also, Speaking Order will be made available
on AICTE web portal in case of LOR with specific reasons for rejection of the application.
Applicants for starting new Technical Institutions other than Government/ Government aided
Institutions whose applications are recommended for Letter of Approval (LoA) by the Executive
Committee shall be informed for the creation of Security Deposit as per APH Provisions.
i. Existing Institutions applied under Clause 1.3.5 and in existence for more than 10 years
with the respective Regulatory Bodies are exempted from the payment of Security Deposit.
ii. Applicants, whose applications (Clause 1.5.2) are recommended for starting new Technical
Institutions shall create the Security Deposit for the balance amount of the Security
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 08
--- Page 24 ---
Deposit created earlier, as per the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook for the
remaining period of 10 years, as applicable. No deposit is required where NOC was already
issued to the Institution for the release of the earlier FDR.
iii. The Applicant shall submit the proof for payment of the Security Deposit along with an
Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation by the Approval Bureau, else a
penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed up to 31st
May and 31st July of the Calendar Year respectively, beyond which the approval shall be
withdrawn.
iv. In case of the Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval that failed to admit the
students in the current Academic Year due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or
Non-Fulfilment of State Government/ UT requirements shall submit an Affidavit for the
same within 7 days from the date of intimation for the credit of Security Deposit in AICTE
bank account to the Approval Bureau. Such Applicants are permitted to pay the Security
Deposit in the next Academic Year as per the above deadlines.
v. Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount in AICTE’s bank account as applicable to
the category of the Institutions indicated below:
Security Deposit applicable for Institutions under Different Programmes @ in Lakh#
Sl. Programme Diploma/Post Diploma Under Graduate Post Graduate Diploma/Post
No. Graduate Degree
Minority/ Others Minority/ Others Minority/ Others
Women’s/ Women’'s/ Women’s/ PwBD/
PwBD/ J&K/ PwBD/ J&K/ J&K/Ladakh /
Ladakh/ North Ladakh / North North Eastern
Eastern States Eastern States States
1 |Engineering
and Technology 12 15 28 35 28 35
2 |Planning 12 15 12 15 12 15
3 | Applied 12 15 12 15 12 15
Artsand Crafts
4 |Design 12 15 12 15 12 15
5 |Hotel
Management 12 15 12 15 12 15
and Catering
Technology
6 |MCA - - - - 12 15
7 |Management 12 15 - - 12 15
#The Security Deposit amount shall be double in case of private leased building / land.
d. The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years. The interest
accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities,
Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships to students, etc.
e. The Principal amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the
term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as
shall be decided on a case to case basis and/ or forfeited in case of any violation of norms,
conditions, and requirements/ Non-Performance by the Institution/ Complaints against the
Institution.
f. Validity of the Letter of Approval for the new Technical Institutions, if issued, shall be for two
Academic Years from the date of issue of Letter of Approval, only for obtaining affiliation
from the respective University/ Board and fulfilling State Government/ UT requirements for
admission in the respective Academic Year.
AICTE S APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 09
--- Page 25 ---
1.10
ALL the Applicants issued LoA for starting the new Technical Institutions shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal for Extension of Approval as specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the
next Academic Year onwards, irrespective of the admission of the students or otherwise.
NOTE: On Expiry of the Validity of Two Years, the LoA issued Stands Cancelled.
An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has
passed out, to verify the fulfillment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
The Council shall Normally not grant Conditional Approval to any Institution.
Applications for an existing Institution for the Closure of the Institution and starting a new
Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year rejected by Council shall be
processed for the Closure of the Programme/ Institution (as applicable)/ Extension of Approval,
as per the choice mentioned in the application following the procedure specified in Chapter
Il of the Approval Process Handbook. However, it is the responsibility of the Institutions to
inform the rejection of the Council to the concerned authorities who had given the NOC for the
Closure of the Institution in view of their application.
A Letter of Approval (LOA)/Letter of Rejection (LOR) with the reasons for rejection of the
application shall be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or before the last date
mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Any Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal
as per Clause 1.10 of this Chapter and the final decision of the Council shall be intimated
through portal on or before the last date mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
LoA shall not be granted after the last date mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
NOTE: In the event of any discrepancy in the issued LOA, brought to the notice of the Council,
a Corrigendum LOA shall be issued with the approval of Competent Authority.
Appeal Procedure
a.
As per the provisions laid down in Clause1.9. of this Chapter, an Institution/ Applicant, if
aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal (through
portal) once to the Council within 7 days from the date of issue of LoR.
The appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee. The
appeal schedule shall be notified on the Web-Portal/website.
Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of Standing Appellate Committee and
not to remain absent in view of the stern time limit given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Hence, the Applicants are instructed to be prepared with the supporting documents in
proof of the compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the Committee, even in case
of short notice.
The Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee and Expert Visit Committee (as applicable)
shall be placed along with the observations of the Approval Bureau, before the Standing
Appellate Committee on the date and time scheduled by AICTE. An Officer of the Council
concerned shall assist the Committee and place relevant records and documents before the
Committee and make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the meetings; however, he/
she shall not be a part of the Committee.
Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents before
the Standing Appellate Committee.
The Standing Appellate Committee shall either Recommend/ Not Recommend the case to the
Council or recommend for scrutiny / Expert Visit Committee. Accordingly, Scrutiny /Expert Visit
Committee shall be conducted as per Clause1.6/1.7 of this Chapter and the reports of the same
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 10
--- Page 26 ---
1.12
shall be placed before another Standing Appellate Committee inviting the representatives of
the Institution along with the compliance and supporting documents for taking a final decision
as to Recommend/ Not Recommended.
The Approval Bureau shall ensure that all the fields of all the Reports are filled completely &
in order.
The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
Applicants, whose applications are recommended for grant of approval by the Council, shall be
informed for submission of Security Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 as per Clause 1.9(c) of
this Chapter.
A Letter of Approval (LOA)/Letter of Rejection (LOR) with the reasons for rejection of the
application shall be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or beforethe last date
mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Appointment of Principal/Director and Faculty in Newly Approved Institution/ Programme
a.
New Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval shall comply with the appointment of
Faculty/ Principal/ Director as the case may be, as per Policy regarding minimum qualifications,
pay scales etc., as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions shall appoint Faculty/Principal/Director, other Technical Supporting Staff and
Administrative Staff strictly in accordance with the methods and procedures of the concerned
affiliating University/ Board, State Government/ UT and Hon'ble Court directions, if any, and as
applicable in the case of selection procedures and Selection Committees.
The information about these appointments of Faculty /Principal/Director, in the prescribed
Format shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal of AICTE.
An Institution shall not commence the Courses, without the appointment of all the Faculty
members and other Staff.
Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical Institution is given in Annexure 5 of
the Approval Process Handbook.
NOTE: All the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions) the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in
Offline mode also. All the processing of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC will be recorded to have Transparency
and Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal is
not necessary if verified online.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 11
--- Page 27 ---
CHAPTER-II
Existing Institutions
2.1
Grant of Approval through Online Application for the following:
+ Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
+ — Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
+ Change of Site/ Location
+ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
+ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions
+ Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating
in the same Campus or City
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in
Gulf Countries
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)
Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course
Closure of the Institution
Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction
in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)
Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/ Board or
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)
Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
Change in the Bank Details
+ Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
+ Extended EoA
Introduction
a.
Institution offering Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall not admit students without prior
approval of the Council.
Each Institution offering Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under
Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall submit an
application through AICTE web portal to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of
Course(s).
The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central,
State and Local Laws and norms of other Regulatory Body, if applicable.
In case of Institutions having Lease agreement for Land, the Council shall not issue EoA from
the Year in which the Live Lease is equal to the number of years of the Course having the
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 12
--- Page 28 ---
2.2
2.3
maximum duration. However, if such Institutions submit the Lease extended for a further 30
years with at least 25 years of Live Lease, EoA shall be considered.
Time Schedule for Processing of Applications
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website from time to time inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and
processing thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice / AICTE Website shall
be final and binding. To process any request from the Institutions regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not valid.
b. The submission of an application on the AICTE Web-Portal and payment of TER Charges shall
not be later than the last date as notified in the Public Notice / AICTE Website from time to time.
Submission of Application by the Promoter
2.3.1 Allotment of USER ID
Gb
If the institution has not obtained USER ID & Password previously, a unique USER ID
along with password shall be allotted on payment of %5500/- (Rupees Five Thousand
Five Hundred Only), through the payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal @www.aicte-
india.org
If any existing Institution has forgotten the Password, the Institution shall apply online for
a new password. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of %5500/- (Rupees Five
Thousand Five Hundred Only) shall be made through the payment gateway on the AICTE
Web-Portal. The proof of payment and an Affidavit 1 for “Forgotten Password” shall be
Uploaded on the portal. AICTE shall verify and make necessary recommendations on the
portal for allotment of Password to the Applicants.
The existing Institutions using their Login credentials shall enter/ edit data as required.
The application in the prescribed Format shall be submitted on AICTE Web-Portal and
a unique identification number is allotted to each application for further reference. The
status of the application shall be tracked at various stages of processing.
2.3.2. Seeking Approval of the Council for:
a.
b.
a9
is
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
Introduction / Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
Change of Site / Location
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
To start new Programme / Level in the existing Institutions
Merger of Institutions under the same Trust / Society / Company operating in the same
Campus or City
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding Academic
Year / Restoration of Intake
Introduction / Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals / Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI) / Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
Increase in Intake / Additional Course(s)
Introduction of Integrated / Dual Degree Course
Closure of the Institution
Introduction / Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure
of Programme(s)/Course(s)
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 13
--- Page 29 ---
o. Change in the Name of Institution or Affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University)
Change in the Minority Status of Institution
Change in the Bank Details
rt. Change in the Name/ Address of Trust/ Society/Company
s. Extended EoA
NOTE: ALL Standalone PGDM/PGCM institutions who have NOT uploaded full details of
all the students since inception of the program on AICTE web portal despite continuous
correspondence since AY 2018 -19 shall NOT be allowed to apply for any of the categories
mentioned above.
2.3.3. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. TER Charges in % Lakh for various applications of (Diploma / Post Diploma / Under
Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree) Institutions are as
given below:
TER Charges (@ in Lakhs)
Type of Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure Break Introduction Continuation of Introduction
Institution Per Division Penalty in EoA/ of OCI/FN/ OCI/FN/Children of Fellow
All PGDM/ Vocational for Late Restoration Children of of Indian Programme
Programmes MBA Courses |Submission ofIntake IndianWorkers Workers in the in
(except in the Gulf Gulf Countries Management
PGDM/ MBA) Countries seats seats per Course
Minority
Institution /
Institution set up
in J&K/ Ladakh/ 0.11 0.28 Nil 2.20 2.20 4.40 0.28 1.10
North Eastern
States / Institution
set up Exclusively
for Women/PwBD
Government/
Government
Aged mestutions Nil Nil Nil 0.15 Nil Nil Nil Nil
University/State
University*
All other 0.17 0.33 Nil 2.20 2.20 5.50 0.28 1.10
Institutions
TER Charges (¢ in Lakhs#)
Type of Institution Change of site/Location / Conversion of Degree Level into Change in the Name of the
Conversion of Diploma Level Diploma Level/Conversion of | Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/
into Degree Level /To start Women’s Institutioninto Co-ed Reduction in Intake/Closure of
each New Programme /Level Institution and vice-versa/ Programme (s)/Course(s)/Change
in the existing Institutions/ Introduction or Continuation in the Name of the Institution/
Change in the Name of the of NRI seats/Increase in Intake/ affiliating University/Board* or
Trust / Society/ Company/ additional Course(s) including” Type of Institution(Institution(s)
Merger of Institutions under Maximum Intake Allowed”/ converted into a University)/
the same Trust /Society/ Introduction of Integrated/Dual Change in the Minority Status of
Company operating in the Degree Course(s) the Institution/address of Trust /
same Campus/City Society / company
Minority Institution/ Institution
setup in J&K/ Ladakh/North 220 oma q
Eastern States/Institution set up ” ‘ be
Exclusively for Women/PwBD
Government/Government Nil Nil Nil
aided Institutions** ' ; '
All other Institutions 3.30 1.10 0.55
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 14
--- Page 30 ---
2.3.4
2.3.5
2.3.6
2.3.7
2.3.8
TER charges for EoA based on Self-Disclosure and Continuation of OCI / FN / Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries seats are considered for the number of Divisions and
Courses respectively of the Applied Intake.
NO TER Charges shall be levied for Postgraduate Degree Courses other than MCA and
Management.
* NOTER Charges shall be levied, if the State Government / UT changes the jurisdiction of
the affiliating University.
** No TER Charges shall be levied for Government / Government Aided Institutions (even
if they are running self-financing courses)
NOTE:
TER Charges for Change in the Bank Details is ¥5500/-(Rupees Five Thousand Five
Hundred only).
Above TER Charges (other than EoA based on Self-Disclosure and Continuation of OCI/
FN/Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries seats) are applicable irrespective of
number of Divisions / Courses.
TER Charges shall NOT be refunded in any case, if the application is processed and
rejected as specified in this Approval Process Handbook.
10% TER charges will increase annually.
b. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee / Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (including
the Court directions) to any type of Institutions (other than Government / Government
Aided), then the Applicant has to remit = 0.55 Lakh through online as an additional TER
Charges.
c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee has to be
conducted (Online / Physical) (inclusive of the Court directions) to any type of Institutions
(other than Government / Government Aided), the Applicant has to remit 31.10 Lakh for
online EVC and % 2.20 Lakh for Physical EVC, through online mode as an additional TER
Charges.
d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline, failing which, the application shall not be considered for processing.
e. Only those applications submitted within the cutoff date shall be considered for
processing, subject to realization of the Payment.
f. Applications submitted under Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Diploma Level into
Degree Level / To start new Programme / Level in the existing Institutions / Merger of
Institutions (under the same Trust / Society / Company operating in the same Campus or
City), if rejected at the Level of Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision,
the TER Charges after a deduction of = 0.55 lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.
All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered / edited are correct. Facility to edit the data is
available until the final submission of the online application.
AICTE Web-Portal permits the generation of Deficiency Report for the online submitted
applications.
After the final submission of the application, the data shall not be allowed for any further
editing, till the processing of application is completed. Hence, the Applicants shall exercise
utmost caution before pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.
Application should be submitted on the AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org on or before
the last date as notified in the Public Notice /AICTE Website.
If an Institution has wrongly submitted an application, the same may be represented to AICTE,
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 15
--- Page 31 ---
2.3.9
2.3.10
2.3.11
2.3.12
2.3.13
2.3.14.
Headquarters along with the Resolution of the Trust / Society / Company (Director / principal
/ Authorized person in case of government institutions), duly signed by the Chairperson /
Secretary to that effect in the Format 3, within 7 days before the last date as notified in the
Public Notice for Approval process /AICTE Web-Portal.
The application shall be reopened ONE TIME to enable the Institution to rectify the same and
resubmit with necessary TER Charges along with the Penalty for Late Submission (as applicable),
with the approval of Competent Authority.
After the submission of the application, if an institution intends to revoke the application for
a specific purpose (other than Extension of Approval), the same shall be represented by the
Institution to AICTE, Headquarters along with the Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company,
duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary to that effect in the Format 3, at least within 7 days
from the last date as notified in the Public Notice /AICTE Website. Such requests shall be
approved by Chairman, AICTE and be informed to Executive Committee. If approved, the TER
Charges after a deduction of $0.25 Lakh/- shall be refunded to the Applicant and if the Closure
of the Course(s)/Programme(s)/Institution is revoked as per the approval of the Council, the
necessary TER Charges for Extension of Approval along with the Penalty for Late Submission,
as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall be paid.
Ifan Applicant intends to withdraw the application for Closure of the Institution / Programme(s)
/ Course(s) which is pending while processing for non-submission of documents, the same
shall be revoked on or before 10th April of the Calendar Year, only if the concerned University
/ Board / State Government / UT gives consent to withdraw the application for Closure, else
the application shall be processed ONLY for the Closure of the Institution / Programme(s) /
Course(s). In case, the Closure of the Institution/ Programme(s) / Course(s) is revoked as per the
approval of the Council, the necessary TER Charges for Extension of Approval along with the
Penalty for Late Submission, as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall
be paid.
An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public Notary or an Oath
Commissioner on =100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper / e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed
& uploaded on AICTE web portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the
provisions, civil and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.
All Institutions shall upload the documents (Digitally Signed using DSC) as per Appendix
17 of the Approval Process Handbook on AICTE Web-Portal. Hard Copies of the Application/
Additional Documents NEED NOT be submitted to the AICTE, HQ.
Applications other than Extension of Approval shall be processed by the Scrutiny/Re-
Scrutiny Committee strictly based on the documents uploaded over AICTE portal.
Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company or a member belonging to these, if charge-sheeted,
Extension of Approval to such Institution shall not be withheld on the basis of charge-sheet
filed by the CBI. AICTE shall consider the grant of Extension of Approval on its merit after looking
into material collected by CBI in the investigation and shall conduct Scrutiny of documents,
Expert Visit Committee and Standing Appellate Committee as required. Extension of Approval
will not be issued only if CBI issues any such orders to AICTE to do so.
Applications completed in all respects shall only be considered for processing.
The applications submitted online along with applicable processing fees (if any) shall be
processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The
Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central, State and Local Laws.
Institutions at random would be subject to surprise inspection for the fulfillment of the norms
of the Approval Process Handbook.
If any document submitted is found to be fraudulent, criminal case shall be filed against the
Director/Principal of the Institution and Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/Company.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 16
--- Page 32 ---
2.4 The Institution shall be given an opportunity to submit the compliance of deficiencies (if any),
before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, to fulfil the criteria of “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-
Disclosure, for processing the application, as applicable.
2.5 Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
2.5.1
2.5.2
Requirements and Eligibility
a. Documents as per Appendix 17.1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Procedure
a. Grant of Extension of Approval is based on Self-Disclosure of required facilities and
Infrastructure availability as submitted online on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.
org. The Council shall grant the desired approval, only after confirming that the Applicant
had fulfilled all the norms and standards specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
b. The Council shall monitor for fulfilment of all norms by the Institution and in the event of
Non-Fulfilment, the Council shall initiate penal action as per the Regulations.
c. In case of The Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval but failed to admit the
students due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State
Government/ UT requirements, the deficiency/ requirement of Faculty and infrastructural
facilities shall be calculated from the year of the admission of the students.
2.6 Introduction/ Continuation of Seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
2.6.1
2.6.2
2.6.3
2.6.4
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institutions are eligible to apply for the Introduction of NRI only after one
batch of students has passed out.
b. The existing Institution seeking approval for admitting Sons / Daughters of Non Resident
Indian(s), Institutions shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal.
c. Five percent (5%) of seats within “Approved Intake” shall be allowed for admission under
NRI category.
d. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Report
generated.
e. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Non-Resident Indian(s)
shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.2
of the Approval Process Handbook.
Procedure
a. Grant of Approval for admission under NRI is based on Self-Disclosure of required facilities
and Infrastructure availability as submitted online on AICTE Web-Portal.
b. In the event of non-availability of students in NRI seats, the seats shall be given to general
candidates as per merit. However, regular Fee shall be applicable to these candidates thus
admitted against vacant NRI seats.
Continuation of NRI Seats
The Institution shall submit an online application (request through portal) for continuation of
approval for NRI seats for each course, as a part of application of Extension of Approval, every
year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.
Admission and Fee
a.
b.
Competent Authority for admission shall be the same as for regular admission and shall
fetch a list of Technical Institutions who have sought approval from the Council.
The Competent Authority for admission shall display the availability of NRI seats, course/
branch wise, in various Institutions, for information of candidates during all stages of
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 17
--- Page 33 ---
admission so that the students can freely exercise their informed choice. The Institutions
shall publish on their Brochure and Web site, the number of NRI seats available in the
Course(s) / Division(s).
Competent Authority for admission shall prepare a merit list of Applicants by inviting
applications from eligible NRI students and admit strictly on merit basis.
A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to
each beneficiary. Students admitted under this scheme shall not be allowed to change
Institution / Course under any circumstances.
The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their
Websites for information to the students and other stake holders.
The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates
to be admitted under NRI seats.
2.7. Change of Site/Location
DI cl
2.7.2
Requirements and Eligibility
a.
The existing Institution seeking approval for the Change of Site / Location shall apply on
AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension of Approval as per norms.
The additional documents to be submitted for Change of Site / Location shall be as per
Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Change of Site / Location shall be allowed within the jurisdiction of the current
affiliating University / Board. For PGDM Institutions, the Change in Site / Location shall be
allowed within the City / Town. However, the convenience / approach ability of all stake
holders of the Institution to the new Site / Location shall also be taken care.
Procedure
a.
The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny Committee followed by an Expert Visit Committee. The date of the
visit shall be communicated through e-mail. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area
as per norms required for the conduct of all the existing Programme(s) and Course(s)
at the new Site / Location. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify the completeness of
Infrastructure ONLY to ensure that academic and other activities be initiated at the new
Site / Location.
The Equipment, Library and other movable property in the existing Institution shall be
shifted to the new Site / Location, only after approval by the Council for Change of Site /
Location.
After shifting of the Equipment, Library and other movable property from the existing
Institution to the new Site/ Location another Expert Visit Committee shall be conducted
before the start of academic session of the current Academic Year again to verify the
availability of facilities at the new Site/Location.
The Change of Site / Location shall be effected only on receipt of final approval in respect
of new Location and approval for activities at previous Location shall cease.
On approval of new Location, all activities of the Institution shall necessarily be carried
out at newly approved Location only.
Any violation in this respect shall lead to Withdrawal of Approval and Institution shall not
be allowed to continue its activities in either of the Locations.
Request for approval for partial shifting of the Programme(s) and Course(s) in the
Institution shall not be considered.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 18
--- Page 34 ---
2h. 3
If any Institution is found to function in an unauthorized / temporary location, violating the
norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook, the Council shall take appropriate
action.
2.8 Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and Vice-Versa
2.8.1
2.8.2
Requirements and Eligibility
a.
The existing Institutions shall be eligible for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma
Level and vice-versa in the same Specialization in ONE Programme only.
The Institutions which are in existence for a minimum period of 5 years ONLY are eligible.
The existing Institutions applying for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and
vice-versa in any Programme shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure of
ALL the existing Courses including Post Graduate Course(s) in the corresponding
discipline, if any.
If the application for Conversion is being rejected, the same shall be processed for the
Closure of the Institution / issue of Extension of Approval as per the choice mentioned in
the application.
The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Diploma Level into
Degree Level and vice-versa shall be as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process
Handbook.
The Conversion shall be permitted for all the Courses in the said Level, however, Partial
conversion of few Courses in the said Level is not permissible. In case, closest available
nomenclature does not exist in Annexure 3 or 4 of the Approval Process Handbook,
then such Course(s) shall be permitted for Conversion in core branch or may close
the course.
The applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the affiliating University/Board and
their views on the same shall be forwarded to the Approval Bureau at AICTE, not later than
one week from the last date of submission of application as per the Public Notice.
In the absence of the receipt of the views from the affiliating University/ Board on the
application, the Council shall proceed for further processing as per the provisions in the
Approval Process Handbook
The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution
Procedure
a.
The existing Institution seeking approval for Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-
versa shall apply for the Course(s) corresponding to the existing one as per Annexure 3
or 4 of the Approval Process Handbook (as applicable) on AICTE Web- Portal as per the
norms. In case, the closest available nomenclature does not exist as per Annexure 3 or 4
of the Approval Process Handbook, then such respective Course(s) shall have to be apply
for conversion in core branch or Close the same.
The application for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level shall be processed
as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook (Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny Committee
followed by an Expert Visit Committee). The date of visit shall be communicated through
e-mail.
Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level shall be processed through Scrutiny / Re-
Scrutiny Committee ONLY (No EVC).
It shall be necessary to provide adequate Infrastructural facilities as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook to conduct all Programme (s) and Course(s).
The Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa shall be affected only
after the grant of approval by the Council and the intake shall be fixed as that of the
“Approved Intake” of the Courses.
If the application for Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa is not
approved, EoA to the Institution shall be issued, however, the deficiencies noted by the
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 19
--- Page 35 ---
2.8.3
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee (as applicable) shall be fulfilled before the
issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.
Applications for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa, rejected
by Council shall be processed for the Closure of the Programme/Institution (as applicable)/
Extension of Approval, as per the choice mentioned in the application following the procedure
specified in Chapter Il of the Approval Process Handbook. However, it is the responsibility of the
Institutions to inform the rejection of application by the Council to the concerned authorities
who had given the NOC for the Closure of the Institution in view of their application.
NOTE: Refund of Security Deposit in excess shall NOT be allowed for Institutions applying for
the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level. In case of applications seeking vice-versa,
the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall have to be fulfilled.
2.9 To Start New Programme / Level in the Existing Institutions
2:9;
Requirements and Eligibility
a.
AICTE &-
The existing Institutions seeking approval to start new Programme/ Level shall apply on
AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension of Approval for the existing Programme(s) and
Course(s) with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process
Handbook.
The Institutions applying under Break in EoA /Restoration of Intake are NOT eligible
to apply.
The Institutions applying under this category shall not be eligible to apply for other
categories listed under Chapter II/ Il of the Approval Process Handbook except Extension
of Approval/ Continuation of NRI/ supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries for the existing Course(s).
The Institution may apply for multiple Programmes and respective levels, not exceeding
THREE Division(s) per course(s).
To start additional/ new Courses at Post Graduate Level, the same shall be processed
as per Clause 2.14 of the Approval Process Handbook wherever corresponding/ allied
Under Graduate Level is available. However, the Constituent Colleges of State/Central
Universities shall be permitted to start Post Graduate Level without corresponding/ allied
Under Graduate Level.
Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be
prepared by an Architect registered with the Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor
and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State
Government/ UT.
However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects as per the
Infrastructure requirements. Institution shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook. Common facilities shall cater the need of the total
“Approved Intake” with total Built-up area equal to the sum total of the area requirement
of each Programme(s)/Level(s).
Institute should have sufficient built up area to cover all the requirements of ALL the
programs/levels conducted as per the provisions of Approval Process Handbook.
Although AICTE does permit sharing of resources, the institute shall provide ample
space for play-ground (owned or hired) facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the
students either in the Campus or through arrangements with other adjacent Institutions,
Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.
The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms)
preferably corresponding to the Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.
The Institution may also seek to change in the Name of the Institution
-2 APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 20
--- Page 36 ---
2.9.2
Procedure
a.
The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
(Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee) followed by an Expert Visit Committee as per Clause
2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook. The date of visit shall be communicated via
e-mail.
If the application for the new Programme/Level is not approved, EoA of the Institution
shall be issued, however, the deficiencies noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit
Committee shall be fulfilled before the issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.
2.10 Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus or City
In view of National Education Policy 2020, to encourage multidisciplinary approach in Higher Technical
Education, the merger of Institutions shall be permitted within city limits.
2.10.1
Parent Institution - An Institution where prospective learning takes place after the Merger.
Child Institution(s) - Institution(s) from which the Courses are to be shifted to the Parent
Institution and cease to exist upon approval of merger of the Institutions.
Requirements and Eligibility
a.
The existing Institutions of the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
location/ city shall be permitted to merge into a single Institution with all the facilities
at the proposed Parent Institution and/ or part/ full facilities of the Child Institution(s),
if necessary.
If all the required facilities are available exclusively in the Parent Institution (without
depending on the facilities of the Child Institution(s)), as the Child Institution(s) shall
be considered for Complete Closure. However, the convenience/ approachability of all
stakeholders of the Child Institution(s) to the Site/ Location of the Parent Institution shall
also be taken care of by the Institutions (including commutation).
NOTE: Intra-Day movement of Students and Faculty not Allowed under any circumstances
(in case of infrastructure & other facilities required by Parent institution after merger are
in multiple locations). Institutions going for such merger shall duly inform all the stake
holders regarding schedule of conduct of Programs / Courses prior to admission
The Institution shall also select the Parent Institution’s PID and may seek changes in the
Name of the Institution.
The total Built-Up area requirement and other facilities required for the entire duration of
all the Programmes /Courses shall be fulfilled in all respects and shall maintain Faculty:
Student ratio as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
The child Institutions shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with their individual
application for Extension of Approval as per the norms, with the additional documentsas
per Appendix 17.4 of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the norms of the
concerned Regulatory Authorities shall also be fulfilled.
NOTE: Child Institutions shall be allowed to submit their application ONLY for EoA (No
changes will be permitted).
All or selected Courses of Child Institution(s) shall be merged with the Parent Institution.
However, the rest of the AICTE approved Courses, if any, in the Child Institution(s) shall be
considered as closed and due procedure for closure of the same shall be followed.
The Parent Institution shall have all infrastructure and other facilities to run ALL the
Courses for the entire duration of both Parent and Child Institution(s).
If Merger of Institutions is approved, the (Child) Institutions that are merged with the
(Parent) Institutions are considered as cease to exist and the liabilities, if any, arise out of
this merger for the Child Institution(s), shall solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/
Parent Institution ONLY.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 21
--- Page 37 ---
The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms)
preferably corresponding to the Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.
In case of Merger of Institutions is approved, eligible refund/ additional TER Charges may
be refunded/ collected, as applicable.
In case, merger of institutions is rejected at Scrutiny/Re-scrutiny level, refund of TER
charges shall be applicable as per Clause 1.4.2. (g)
2.10.2 Procedure
a.
The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
with Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee followed by an Expert Visit Committee. The date of
the visit shall be communicated through email.
Built-Up area requirement and Faculty: Student ratio for the entire duration for all the
Programmes as specified in the Approval Process Handbook should be maintained after
the merger.
Affidavit 2 shall be submitted to the effect that the Built-up area remain the same before/
after the merger of the Institutions and shall not be utilized for other purposes.
If anyone of the Institution is Women’s Institution, then the application shall be processed
first for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution by Scrutiny/ Re-
Scrutiny Committee, if found in order, then only the application shall be processed further
for Merger of Institutions following the respective procedure specified in the Approval
Process Handbook.
The intake shall be fixed as that of the “Approved Intake” of the Course. “Approved Intake”
for the Courses of the Institution after the merger shall be combined intake of parent and
child institutions.
If the application for merger of Institution is NOT approved, EoA of the individual
Institutions shall be issued.
2.10.3 The Council reserves its right to reject the application for merger of Institutions under the same
Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus, if it finds the reasons given are not
justified or Commercial or Business angle is suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.
NOTE: It shall be the responsibility of the Promoter to take approval from the other Regulatory
Bodies, (if applicable) in view of merger of the Institutions.
Extension of Approval of the Existing Institutions after a Break in the Preceding Academic Year(s)/
Restoration of Intake
2.11.1 Restoration of Intake under Break in EoA
2.11.1.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a
The Institution seeking approval after Break in EoA (break in obtaining extension of
approval by an institution on their own in the previous year(s)) shall apply on the AICTE
Web-Portal along with the documents as per Appendix 17.1 of the Approval Process
Handbook. However, Institution not applied for EoA for SIX years consecutively shall
not be eligible to apply under Break in EoA and such Institutions shall apply as a New
Technical Institution following appropriate procedure for Closure of the Programmes/
Courses approved.
The Institution(s) applying under this category shall not be permitted to apply for other
categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook except
reduction in intake.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 22
--- Page 38 ---
2.11.1.2 Procedure
Institutions not applied for Extension of Approval in the preceding Academic Years shall be
considered as“Break-in-EoA” and shall be processed for Extension of Approval upon verification
of adequate Infrastructural facilities as specified in the Approval Process Handbook by an
Expert Visit Committee.
2.11.2. Restoration of Intake under punitive/penal action
2.12.1
2.11.2.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a __ The Institution seeking approval for Restoration of Intake under punitive/penal action
shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the documents as per Appendix 17.1
of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Institution not applied for Restoration
within next Academic Year shall be considered that penal action is accepted by the
Institution and willing to continue with the same reduced intake as “Approved Intake”.
Institution under “NO ADMISSION” may apply for restoration in the next Academic
Year and before completion of SIX years. Thereafter, such institution shall apply as a
New Technical Institution following appropriate procedure.
b The Institution(s) applying under this category shall not be permitted to apply for
other categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook
except reduction in intake.
2.11.2.2 Procedure
Restoration of Intake for an Institution shall be processed upon verification of the
availability of adequate Infrastructural and other facilities as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook by Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny / Expert Visit Committee / SHC / SAC.
Introduction/Continuation of Supernumerary Seats for Foreign Nationals/Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institution having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA, and
if the valid accreditation period is beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, seeking
approval for the Introduction of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.5 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
b. Institutions selected for Study in India Programme by the Government of India are
eligible for introduction of FN/OCI/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries in ALL
Programmes/ Courses without Expert Visit Committee and TER Charges.
c. Ifthe Institution is providing Fee waiver to the selected students as per their commitment
to the Government, the TER Charges for continuation of supernumerary seats for FN/OCI/
Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall be waived. However, the Institution shall
upload on AICTE Web portal the selection letter for Study in India Programme and the
document for the Fee waiver provided to the students.
d. Institutions having Infrastructural facilities based on AICTE norms and fulfilling following
criteria shall be eligible to apply for approval for admitting students in this scheme.
e. The Institutions shall provide suitable Hostel/ Residential accommodation to the Foreign
Students/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) and Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries.
Further the Institutions shall also establish an Office with a Student Counselor to take care
of the needs of the students admitted. An Induction Programme shall be arranged for
such students to get acquainted to the Indian condition.
f. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.
g. The Institution was not under any punitive action previously by AICTE.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 23
--- Page 39 ---
2.12.2
2.12.3
2.12.4
2.12.5
2.12.6
h. Fifteen percent (15%) supernumerary seats over and above the “Approved Intake” per
Course shall be approved by AICTE approved Institutions and University Departments, for
admitting students from Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India/ Children of Indian
Workers in the Gulf Countries. One third (1/3) of these 15% seats shall be reserved for the
Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.
i. | Any vacant seat in a given Course, out of 1/3rd seats reserved for Children of Indian
Workers in the Gulf Countries shall be reverted to the seats of 2/3rd meant for OCI/ Foreign
Nationals and vice-versa. Further, any vacant seat in the “Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries” after the last round
of the admission of the concerned State Government/ UT may be filled with NRI seats,
subject to the approval from AICTE for the NRI seats and fulfillment of requisite norms as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
j. | Apart from the above, any vacant seat in the “Approved Intake” after the last round of
the admission of the concerned State Government/ UT, may be filled with NRI/ Foreign
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries,
subject to the approval from AICTE for the above seats and fulfillment of requisite norms
as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Procedure
a. The Institution having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA with valid
accreditation period beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, availability of adequate
Infrastructural facilities and other requirements as per the Norms of the Approval Process
Handbook shall be verified by Expert Visit Committee.
b. Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) /Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries admitted in AICTE approved Institutions through Indian Council for Cultural
Relation (ICCR or as Government of India nominee) shall be included within this ceiling
The Institution shall submit online application MANDATORILY FOR EACH COURSE (if required/
Interested) for Continuation of approval for supernumerary seats for admitting Foreign
National/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) / Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries, as a part
of application of Extension of Approval, every year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.
If any punitive action is enforced on an Institution, NRI/ OCI Children of Indian Workers in the
Gulf Countries seats shall be withdrawn.
Institutions admitting Foreign Nationals should ensure registration of foreign students with
concerned Foreigners Regional Registration Officer (FRRO) as well as with the local police
station about their entry and exit in India. Further the Institutions shall adhere to the prevalent
norms specified by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India from time to time.
Fees and Admission
a. The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates
admitted under Foreign Nationals/ OCI seats. The children of Indian workers in the Gulf
Countries shall be treated at par with resident Citizens if admitted to seats reserved for
them i.e. One Third (1/3) of 15% supernumerary seats. The Fee prescribed for NRI seats
shall not be applicable to this admission.
b. Admission to these seats shall be made on merit basis among Applicants of these
categories
2.13 Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and Vice-Versa
2.13.1
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for the Conversion of Women's Institution into
Co-Ed Institution and vice-versa shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension
of Approval as per the norms.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 24
--- Page 40 ---
2.13.2
b. The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into
Co-Ed Institution and vice-versa shall be as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process
Handbook
c. The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution
Procedure
a. The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee (as per Clause 1.6) all verify the additional
documents as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institutionand vice-versa.
b. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area as per the norms required to conduct all the
existing Course(s). However, all the exclusive facilities for Women only Institution shall
also be maintained.
c. If the application for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and
vice-versa is not approved, EoA to the Institution shall be issued, however, the deficiencies
noted by the Online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be fulfilled before the issue of
EoA for the next Academic Year.
d. The Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa shall be
affected only after the grant of approval by the Council.
2.14 Increase in Intake / Additional Course(s)
2.14.1
2.14.1.1
2.14.2
The existing Institutions shall expand its activities by the Addition of new/ additional Course(s)/
Divisions, provided they havea valid National Board of Accreditation (NBA) in place for following
reasons. (However they may go up to 360 intake without NBA).
a. Increased demand in certain domains as per the industrial need for technical personnel.
b. To increase the utilization of Infrastructure available at the Technical Institutions.
c. Ensure quality of Technical Education being imparted.
Promotion of Indian languages in Technical Education
National Education Policy 2020 envisages the availability of Higher Technical Education in Indian
Languages at Diploma/Degree level. AICTE shall permit an addition of ONE division with 30/60
seats to the eligible and interested institutes. Institutions seeking approval shall be permitted
for Increase in intake against “Approved Intake” or in accredited courses as Supernumerary.
In addition, AICTE has been facilitating this by way of encouraging and funding academicians
to write books or translate books in Indian Languages, create MOOC and translate MOOC into
Indian Languages.
The major emphasis of NEP-2020 is to impart education in mother tongue so as to enhance the
creativity, critical thinking among the students. In alignment with the provisions of National
Education Policy (NEP) 2020, All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) has initiated
Technical Book writing scheme in 13 languages viz Hindi, Tamil, Gujarati, Kannada, Marathi,
Bengali, Telugu, Punjabi, Odia, Assamese, Malayalam, Urdu & English. The books in Indian
language are available for download for free of cost at https://ekumbh.aicte-india.org
As these Indian edition books are affordable, institutes are encouraged to use these books as
text/ reference books.
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Institution shall have valid NBA accreditation for the existing Course(s) as deemed
necessary. The Institution applied for NBA and waiting for the results of the visit is also
eligible to apply, but a valid NBA Certificate shall be produced at the time of Scrutiny.
b. NOC for additional course(s) from the affiliating University /Board /DTE.
c. Increase in intake / Additional Course in Diploma / Under Graduate /Post Gradate level in
Engineering and Technology shall be permissible in all courses subject to the Institution is
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 25
--- Page 41 ---
2.14.3
already offering minimum three (3) courses in Core Branches (as listed in below mentioned
clause 2.14.4 (b) (Not applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).
All PG programs being specialized and Emerging in the respective engineering branches,
are permitted as Emerging/ Multidisciplinary areas. Institutions/Universities are expected
to revise the curricula regularly for being industry-relevant in line with NEP 2020.
The Institution seeking approval for Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s) shall apply
on AICTE Web-Portal along with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
Building Plan for the entire duration for all Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s) of the
Institution shall be prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/
Licensed Surveyor and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by
concerned State Government/ UT.
However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects as per the
Infrastructure requirements. Institution shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook. Common facilities shall cater the need of the total
“Approved Intake” with total Built-up area equal to the sum total of the area requirement
of each Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s).
No punitive action is pending against the Institution or FIR is filed by CBI or any other
investigative agency.
Action taken on those Institutions based on the Chapter VIII for the non-fulfillment of the
norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall not be eligible for Increase in
Intake/ Additional Course(s), even if the Course(s) are having valid NBA accreditation.
Institutions shall be eligible for new Course(s) / expansion of existing Course(s), equal to the
number of valid NBA accredited Course(s), limited to a maximum of FOUR within the definition
of Division/ Programme/ Level, subject to the following conditions
a.
A maximum of three Divisions shall be allowed to be added in the existing valid NBA
accredited Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Course(s), subject to the condition
that total number of Divisions after expansion per Course shall not exceed the “Maximum
Intake Allowed” as specified in Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook.
NOTE: NBA validity of one accredited course can be used for increase in intake of other
non-accredited course. The increase in intake is allowed in Conventional/Emerging/
Multidisciplinary Area courses. (Not applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).
New Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Course(s) in the same Programme with only ONE
Division shall be allowed at the respective Level. However, New Post Graduate Course(s)
in the same Programme with ONLY ONE Division shall be allowed in specializations where
corresponding or relevant Under Graduate Degree Course(s) is accredited (except MCA
and Management)
Institutions with any accredited Course shall be permitted to utilize the benefit of
accreditation ONLY ONCE for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s) etc. (Not
applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).
If an Institution is having more than FOUR accredited Courses, the accredited Course(s)
above FOUR shall be utilized for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s) in the
subsequent years subject to the validity of accreditation.
Institution getting approval for new Course(s) in a particular Academic Year shall also be
considered for grant of NRI/ OCI/ FN/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries,
subject to fulfilment of norms of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the institutes
need to apply for the same on portal for new courses(s) also.
NBA awards accreditation for either 3 or 6 years. An institution having a valid NBA
accreditation shall utilize for an increase in the Intake/ Introduction of a new Course ONLY
ONCE within a span of 6 years.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 26
--- Page 42 ---
However, institutes which had accreditation for 3 years, even if the accreditation is
renewed for another 3 years, shall take benefit of introducing a new course or increased
division only once during the 6 years.
No increase in the Intake shall be given to Institutions where FIR/ CBI/ CVC/ any other
investigation agency/ Anti-Ragging/ Punitive actions are initiated by AICTE for any
violation in the norms and standards where inquiries are pending. Such Applications of
Institutions shall be processed through a Standing Hearing Committee and the Report
shall be placed before the Executive Committee for further processing of issuance of
approval or rejection.
2.14.4 For existing Institutions not having NBA accreditation
a.
The existing Institutions having total “Approved Intake” equal to/less than the “Maximum
Intake Allowed"/Institutions not eligible to apply for NBA accreditation, shall be
permitted to increase (without NBA accreditation) in intake (Conventional/ Emerging/
Multidisciplinary area courses) in the same Level in the same Programme (Diploma/
Under Graduate/ MCA/ Management) up to the “Maximum Intake Allowed” in each
Programme as that of a new Technical Institution, as per Appendix 3 of the Approval
Process Handbook, subject to the “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure on AICTE
Web- Portal.
The existing Institutions having total “Approved Intake” exceeding the “Maximum Intake
Allowed” seeking for approval for Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) (without NBA
accreditation) in the same Level in the same Programme (Diploma/Under Graduate/MCA/
Management) shall have to apply for the Reduction of Course(s) as per the Procedure
and shall apply for increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) in lieu of the same, without
exceeding the total “Approved Intake” as well as the number of Courses/ Divisions as
specified in Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook, subject to “Nil Deficiency”
based on Self-Disclosure on AICTE Web-Portal. Number of New Courses/ increase in intake
in Conventional / Emerging / Multidisciplinary area allowed, shall be restricted to FOUR
(in terms of Divisions) per Programme/ Level (Diploma / Under Graduate / Computer
Application- MCA / Management).
However, Reduction in “Core branches” (Agriculture Engineering, Automobile
Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical
Engineering, Electronics Engineering, Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering,
Food Technology, Industrial Engineering, Instrumentation, Mechanical Engineering,
Metallurgy, Mining Engineering and Textile Engineering) shall be allowed to a maximum
of 50% of previously “Approved Intake”.
Under any circumstances, new Post Graduate Degree Course(s) (except MCA and
Management) shall NOT be permitted in the above Clauses (a) and (b).
NBA accredits the Courses in Engineering and Technology, Hotel Management and
Catering Technology, MCA and Management Programmes.
NBA has not started accreditation of courses in Applied Arts and Crafts and Design and
hence increase in “Intake” in these programmes up to the maximum permissible limit shall
NOT require accreditation.
The Institutions offering the Courses in Applied Arts and Crafts and Design shall be eligible
to apply for new Course(s) at the Post Graduate Level only after two batches of students
pass out and the same shall be permitted for a maximum of FIVE Courses/ Divisions, subject
to “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure on AICTE Web-Portal. However, for every Post
Graduate Course, there should be at least one Professor with Ph.D. qualification. In case of
non-availability of qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.
NOTE: As and when accreditation for the above Courses is started by the NBA, such
Institutions who have been approved by AICTE to run Course(s) at the Post Graduate Level
shall obtain NBA accreditation within two years.
Existing Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology shall be permitted to
convert to courses in Emerging/Multidisciplinary Areas for the same “Approved intake”
within the Major Discipline specified in Annexure 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 27
--- Page 43 ---
2.14.5
2.14.6
2.14.7
h. An Expert Visit Committee shall be conducted, any time before the first batch of students
has passed out, to verify the fulfilment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
i. In all the above cases, the Institution shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the
additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Procedure
a. Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the
Approval Process Handbook submitted for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s).
b. An appeal shall be allowed for submitting NBA/ UGC Autonomy Certificate, if it was not
issued by the NBA/ UGC at the time of the Scrutiny.
Institutions having an “Approved Intake” less than a Divisions in any of the Course(s) as
prescribed by the Council may apply for Intake of full Division size themselves (within the
“approved /maximum allowed intake”) and shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio accordingly,
without NBA accreditation/ NOC from affiliating University / Board/ State Government/ UT;
subject to “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure in AICTE Web-Portal. However, this is NOT
applicable in case of Institutions under penal action
NOTE: Affiliation with two different Universities for the same Technical programme/Courses
shall NOT be permitted
Introduction / Continuation of specialized courses like MBA/PGDM (IEV) will be processed as
per the provisions mentioned in Annexure 14
2.15 Introduction of Integrated / Dual Degree Course
2.15.1
2.15.2
In respect of Integrated / Dual Degree Course(s), UGC norms shall be applicable, as per Section
4 of PART Ill of UGC Gazette Notification, 2014 and amended from time to time.
a. Five Years Integrated Degree in Engineering and Technology leading to Master of
Technology (M.Tech.), Nomenclature shall be as per Major Disciplines of Engineering and
Technology given in Annexure 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. Five Years Integrated Degree in Planning leading to Master of Planning.
c. Five Years Integrated Degree in Computer Applications leading to Master of Computer
Application.
d. Five Years Integrated Degree in Management leading to Master of Business Administration
(MBA).
e. Five years Integrated Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology leads to a
Master in Hotel Management and Catering Technology.
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institutions where Course(s) in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/ Hotel
Management and Catering Technology/ MCA/ Management Programme are already
in existence shall be eligible to apply on AICTE Web-Portal for approval of respective
Integrated Degree. It is mandatory for the existing Engineering and Technology/Planning/
Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA/ Management Course to be accredited
by NBA to start the respective Integrated Degree Course.
1
b. Approval shall be considered only to those Institutions where there is “Nil Deficiency”
based on Self-Disclosure & Not eligible for the Introduction of NRI/ OCI/ FN/ Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.
c. Collaboration and Twinning Programme shall NOT be permitted for these Course(s).
d. Applicants shall upload relevant documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval
Process Handbook on AICTE Web portal.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 28
--- Page 44 ---
University affiliation for these Course(s) shall be necessary before effecting admission.
Only one Division of 60 students (40 students in case of Planning) shall be approved for
Institutions applying for Integrated Degree in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/
Management/ MCA where University affiliated Course(s) in Engineering and Technology/
Planning/ Management/ MCA Programme respectively are already in existence.
In case of Hotel Management and Catering Technology, approval shall be given for only
60 students within “Approved Intake” for Institutions applying for Five Years Integrated
Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology. However, this Intake shall not be
additional Intake. The approval shall be for selecting 60 students amongst the students
already admitted in the Institution to form a batch for this Course.
2.15.3 Procedure
ide
The institute has to apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per the
Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6
of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for the addition of respective Integrated
Degree Course.
2.16 Closure of Institution
2.16.1
2.16.2
2.16.3
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institution seeking for Progressive Closure or Complete Closure shall apply
on AICTE Web-Portal as per norms.
b. There shall be NO TER Charges to apply for closure.
c. Incase of Progressive Closure, Closure at the First Year Level shall be allowed in the current
Academic Year and the subsequent years of working shall be closed at the end of each
Academic Year progressively. However, final Closure order shall be issued after completion
of the Programme(s) and submission of Affidavit 4 by the Institution.
d. Incase of Complete Closure, the Institution shall be closed completely in one Instance.
e. Progressive Closure or Complete Closure is subject to no pending Court case filed against
the Institution by AICTE and no Charge sheet filed against the Institution.
f. The Institutions shall not be eligible to apply to other categories listed under Chapter II/
III/V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook.
g. The additional documents to be submitted for Closure of the Institution shall be as per
Appendix 17.7of the Approval Process Handbook
h. For Closure of PGCM/ PGDM Institution, NOC from affiliating University/ Board/ State
Government/ UT is NOT applicable.
Procedure
a. a. The institute has to apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per
the Appendix 17.7 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.7 of
the Approval Process Handbook.
c. The Closure of the Institution shall be affected only on receipt of approval by the Council.
Applications of existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the Institution, and if such
application is not approved by the Council due to certain deficiencies; the Institution shall be
given Extension of Approval with ZERO Intake for the current Academic Year. Such Institutions shall
submit all relevant documents after all the students have passed out (or) redistributed to near by
AICTE approved Institutions through the affiliating University/ Board and seek official Closure of
the Institution.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 29
--- Page 45 ---
2.16.4 The application for the Closure of the Institution shall be valid for the duration of the respective
Programme offered by the Institution within which the Institution should submit the required
mandatory documents. Else, AICTE may close the Institution with the intimation to the affiliating
University/Board and the State Government/UT and shall issue a Public Notice regarding the same.
In case of such Institutions where Security Deposits are to be released, a penalty of 10% of the
value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed before the release of Security Deposit.
Further, Institutions not applied on the portal from past preceding six years for EoA, AICTE may close
the Institution with the intimation to the affiliating University/Board and the State Government/
UT and shall issue a Public Notice regarding the same. In case of such Institutions where Security
Deposits are to be released, a penalty of 10% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed
before the release of Security Deposit.
2.17 Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management (FPM)
a.
2.17.1
The existing Institutions are eligible to apply for the Introduction of Fellow Programme in
Management after one batch of students pass out.
The approval shall be granted for the complete duration of the Fellow Programme in
Management.
The minimum duration of the Course shall be 3 years, but shall not exceed 5 years. However,
in exceptional circumstances beyond 5 years, the student shall have to re-register and has to
complete within the extended period of 2 years.
Requirements and Eligibility
a. Institutions where Course(s) in Management Programme (MBA/MMS/PGDM) are already
in existence shall be eligible to apply for approval of Fellow Programme in Management.
It is mandatory for the existing Management Course (as applicable) to be accredited by
NBA to start Fellow Programme in Management.
b. The Institution should have a valid accreditation by NBA.
c. The existing Institution seeking approval for Introduction of Fellow Programme in
Management shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal.
d. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Report
generated.
e. Since inception, the Institution should have been free from serious Complaints regarding
the CBl investigation, ragging, Non-Payment of dues to Council and other punitive actions.
f. The Institution should have the required number of Full Time Faculty members as per
AICTE norms for offering Fellow Programme in MBA/ MMS/ PGDM Programme.
g. The Institutions should have at least 50% and 25% of the Full Time Faculty members
with Ph.D./ Fellow from AICTE approved Institutions/ AIU recognized University/ reputed
University from abroad /IIM, if the Institutions apply for 20 seats and 10 seats respectively.
These Faculty members should have at least two papers published in refereed
indexed cited International/ National Journals in the last 3 years. Each Professor and
Associate Professor shall not guide more than FOUR and TWO research scholars
respectively at a time.
h. The Institution should have subscribed Journals in Business Management area of
Organizational Behaviour/ Human Resource, Finance and Accounts, Marketing,
Operations, IT Systems, Economics, etc.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 30
--- Page 46 ---
2.17.2. Procedure
a.
The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Fellow Programme shall
apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Introduction of Fellow
Programme in Management.
The eligible Institution shall be allotted a maximum of 20 seats for Fellow Programme in
Management. However, the Institution may apply for 10 seats also.
If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution
shall have the right to appeal as per Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.17.3 Student's eligibility, procedure for admission and conduct of the Programme shall be as per
details given in Appendix 20 of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.17.4 The Institution shall submit an application for Continuation of approval for Fellow Programme
in Management as a part of application of Extension of Approval, every year, giving details of
Faculty and other facilities.
Change in the Name of the Course(s)/Merger of the Course(s)/Reduction in Intake/Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)
2.18.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a.
The existing Institutions seeking approval for Change in the Name of the Course(s) (Refer
Annexure 6 or 7 of the Approval Process Handbook)/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme/ Course shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as
per Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Reduction of Core branches (as specified in 2.14.4(b)) shall be permitted up to 50% of
“Approved Intake”. However, in case of closure of core branches the institution shall not
be permitted for an increase in intake/New Course against such proposed closure.
Change in the name of the Course is permissible ONLY in case of the mentioned
nomenclature is not offered by the affiliating university/body as per the guidelines given
in Annexure 6 or 7 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Merger of certain Course(s) in Engineering and Technology in Under Graduate Degree
and Diploma Course(s) is permitted as per the guidelines given in Annexure 6 or 7 of the
Approval Process Handbook as well as different specializations / courses of MBA / PGDM is
permitted, so that the Intake after merger shall be equal to the sum total of the individual
Course(s) and Divisions, provided the Faculty student ratio be maintained. Partial merger
of Divisions is NOT permissible. For example, if an Institution offering Courses such as
Computer Science and Engineering and Software Engineering, both the Courses shall be
merged EITHER to Computer Science and Engineering or Software Engineering.
Institutions may apply for reduction in Intake in any of the Course(s) within a Division (non-
zero) by themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain Faculty: Student ratio accordingly
without NOC from affiliating University/Board/State Government/UT and the restoration
shall be permitted within a Division without NBA. Institutions may apply for restoration
to the same level by themselves on the AICTE Web-Portal. However, such restoration shall
not exceed the “Approved Intake” which was prior to such reduction.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 31
--- Page 47 ---
Illustration for Reduction / Restoration in Intake
No. of Divisions Approved Intake Permissible Reduction in Permissible Intake for
Intake Restoration
1
2 120 90 120
2 120 60 60
3} 180 150 180
3 180 120 120
No. of Divisions Approved Intake Permissible Reduction in Permissible Intake for
for Post Graduate Intake Restoration
2.18.2 Procedure
a. The Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Name
of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/
Course(s), as applicable.
b. Applications of the existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the
Programme(s)/ Course(s), and if such application is not approved by the Council due to
certain deficiencies, the Institution shall be given Extension of Approval with ZERO Intake
in such Courses for the current Academic Year.
The application for the Closure of the Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall be valid for the
duration of the respective Course offered by the Institution within which the Institution
should submit the required mandatory documents. Else, AICTE shall initiate appropriate
action to close the Programme(s)/ Course(s).
2.19 Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/Board or Type of Institution
Institution(s) converted into a University.
2.19.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a. The existing Institution seeking approval for a Change in the Name of the Institution
or affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a
University) shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the relevant documents as per
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. — Institutions applying for Change in the Name of the Institution shall follow the conditions
specified in Clauses 1.5.4 and 1.5.5 of the Approval Process Handbook
c. The Applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the affiliating University/Board
and their views on the same shall be forwarded to the Approval Bureau, within one month
from the date of receipt of the application.
In the absence of the receipt of the views of the affiliating University/ Board on the
application, the Council shall proceed for further processing as per the provisions of
Approval Process Handbook.
d. Institution(s) of the same Trust/ Society/ Company applying for Change of Type of
Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) shall apply separately for EoA
based on Self- Disclosure/ any other categories mentioned in Chapter II/ Ill and pay the
TER Charges, as applicable. The Institution may also seek for Change in the Name of the
Institution.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 32
--- Page 48 ---
2.19.2 Procedure
a.
The institute shall apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per the
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Name of
the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted
into a University), as applicable. However, in the application submitted for Change of Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University), if the Institution(s) applying for
Additional Intake than the “Approved Intake’, the requirements, eligibility and procedure
shall be as per the concerned Clauses of Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook
The Institution shall submit a representation to AICTE in case of Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University) after the last date of submission of online
application. The same shall be proceeded as per above clause (b).
In case of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) after the last date
of issuance of EoA as mentioned in the Academic Calendar, the same shall be proceeded
as per above clause (b). However, Institution shall not be permitted to make any changes
in the already approved intake capacity for the said Academic Year.
2.20 Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
2.21
2.20.1 Requirements and Eligibility
The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Minority status of the Institution
shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the relevant documents as per Appendix17.10
of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.20.2 Procedure
a.
The online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.10 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Minority
status of the Institution.
The Institution may also seek for Change in the Name of the Institution.
The Change in the Minority status of the Institution shall be effected only after the grant
of approval by the Council.
All the benefits/facilities applicable for the Minority institutions (converted from Non-
Minority to Minority) shall come in to force ONLY from the subsequent academic year.
NOTE: The ONLINE procedure shall remain same for change in Minority Status (Minority
to Non-Minority or Non-Minority to Minority) except for the documents to be produced
as mentioned in Appendix 17.10 of Approval Process Handbook
2.20.3. Refund of TER Charges/ Security Deposit in excess shall NOT be allowed for Institutions applying
for the Change in the Minority status of their Institution (Non-Minority to Minority).
Change in the Bank Details
2.21.1 Requirement and Eligibility
a.
b.
C
The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Bank Details shall apply on
the AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.12 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
The Change in the Bank Details shall be applicable, only if it is a Scheduled Bank.
Merger of the banks (as per Government notification)
2.21.2 Procedure
The Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix17.12 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Bank Details.
No Objection Certificates (NOC) from previous/old bank.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 33
--- Page 49 ---
In case of merger of banks, NOC/Certificate from the bank to the effect that two or more banks
are merged subject to government notification
2.22 Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
2.23
2.22.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a.
The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/
Society/ Company including the merger of the Companies shall apply on AICTE Web-
Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.13 of the Approval Process
Handbook.
The change shall be permitted only for those Trusts/ Societies/ Companies which have
not been disqualified by the AICTE/ Court of Law/ any Statutory Body in the past.
In case of any dispute among the members of Trusts/ Societies/ Companies is of such
nature that it would affect the standard of the Institution, then AICTE shall withhold the
approval as long as it may deem fit.
Further, AICTE shall have the right to lien over the FDR till such time dispute among Trustees
or members is not settled by an Arbitrator or the Court of competent jurisdiction as
contemplated in the Trust/Society/Company document, by virtue of which amalgamation
took place.
A Trust/Society may create a new Company to hold their assets, and once the transferred
of assets is complete, the Trust/Society may be dissolved and the ownership may be
transferred to the company. Such viability shall vary depending on the jurisdiction and
context.
2.22.2 Procedure
The procedure as applicable for new institution defined under the Clause 1.6 shall be followed
for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
2.22.3. The Council reserves its right to reject the application for Change in the Name/Address of the
Trust/Society/ Company if it finds the reasons given are not justified or commercial or business
angle is suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.
Extended EoA
2.23.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a.
Each Institution offering Technical Programme shall submit an application to the Council,
every year for Extension of Approval of Course(s) offered by the Institution. However,
In case of Institutions having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA, and if
the valid accreditation period is beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, the period of
approval for such Institutions for the existing Course(s) shall be for a minimum period of
THREE years or for the Academic Year up to which the NBA accreditation is valid, whichever
is more.
(OR)
In case of Institutions having Academic Autonomous status given by UGC and conferred by
the affiliating University or Graded Autonomy given by AICTE to Standalone Institutions,
and if the live Autonomy period is valid beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, the
period of approval for such Institutions for the existing Course(s) shall be for a minimum
period of THREE years or for the Academic Year up to which the Autonomy is valid,
whichever is more.
The Institution seeking approval for Extended EoA shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal
along with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process
Handbook.
The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Deficiency
Report generated through Web-Portal.
No punitive action shall be pending against the Institution or FIR filed by CBI or any other
investigative agency.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 34
--- Page 50 ---
2.23.2 Procedure
a. The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional document as per Appendix
17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Extended EoA.
b. _ Institutions approved for extended EoA are waived from paying TER Charges for Extension
of Approval (EoA) ONLY for the extended years for the existing Programme(s) and Course(s)
at the time of issue of Extended EoA. However, such Institutions are required to submit
the application for EoA and maintain ALL the norms and standards as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. In the subsequent years, if the Institution intends to apply
for any other Categories mentioned in Chapter Il (for changes in Approval status), the
corresponding TER Charges as per Approval Process Handbook shall be applicable.
c. The Council shall monitor for fulfilment of all norms by the Institution and in the event of
Non-Fulfilment, the Council shall initiate penal action as per Regulations and the extended
approval shall be withdrawn. In such eventuality, the Institution needs to apply afresh and
remit the TER Charges in the subsequent years.
NOTE: Institutions under extended EoA period shall apply for extension of approval
annually and provide the data on AICTE portal as required & applicable.
2.24 Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee
a.
The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated by a Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval Process Hand book by the Approval
Bureau by the selection of members through the automated selection process provided on
AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable
to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then Approval Bureau
with approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to pick another expert from the
approved panel of the experts from the portal.
The date and time for Scrutiny Committee shall be informed by the Approval Bureau.
The Approval Bureau of the Council shall assist the Committee and place relevant records and
documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the
meetings; however, he/ she shall not be part of the Committee.
Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with
Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents before the
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall present their application and ALL original documents along with self- attested
copies as per Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook, before the Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and NOT to remain absent at the
time of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.
The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the documents submitted/presented by the Applicant as
mentioned above and shall countersign all the documents that are accepted (if conducted
Offline).
Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant through the Web-Portal.
Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny shall
be eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by the AICTE.
The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify only the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
Committee as per the norms and standards and shall counter sign all the documents that are
accepted.
The Approval Bureau shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee Report are filled completely.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 35
--- Page 51 ---
The scanning and uploading of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee Report shall be done by
the Approval Bureau.
Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee shall be processed further to incorporate the necessary changes in the issue of
Extension of Approval.
The attested copies of original documents shall be retained by the Approval Bureau in case of
offline Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.
2.25 Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee
a.
The Expert Visit Committee shall be constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval Process
Handbook by the Approval Bureau, ACITE by the selection of members through the automated
selection process provided in AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Expert Visit
Committee is unable to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then
Approval Bureau with approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to pick another
expert from the approved panel of the experts from the portal.
Expert Visit Committee wherever applicable, shall verify actual availability of Faculty, Equipment,
Computers, Software, Internet, Printers, Book Titles, Book Volumes and subscription of National
and International Journal set. As specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Further, Expert
Visit Committee members should interact with students and Faculty members, in the absence
of Institution authorities. The Expert Visit Committee shall also verify the facts relating to
Complaints, and give specific remarks in the Report. Experts shall carry the Identity Card of
their Organization.
Additional experts, if required, may be co-opted in any of the Committee for processing of
applications, Complaints, etc.
The Approval Bureau, AICTE shall make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the Expert
Visit Committee; however, he/ she shall not be a part of the Committee.
The Expert Visit Committee shall have access to the Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee, if applicable.
The Applicant shall arrange for Video recording at his/ her own expense with the date and time
of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit Committee and shall hand over the same to the
Committee which shall form a part of the Expert Visit Committee Report.
In case of online Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall prepare a video showcasing all
the infrastructural facilities for not less than 30 minutes and shall upload the same in their
respective website and share the link in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents
(as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 16.2 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be
uploaded on portal.
In case of offline Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall arrange for Video recording
(institution expense) with the date and time of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit
Committee. The institution shall upload in their respective website and share the link in the
web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix
16.2 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.
NOTE: The video recording with briefing by one of the Experts for not less than 30 minutes shall
cover the entry and exit of the Committee with time ,the Building Plan approved and signed
by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, GPS Coordinates at the entrance of the main Building,
Class rooms, Laboratories, Workshops, Office Room, Barrier free environment facilities such as
ramp/ lift/ toilets, Library, Computer Centre, meeting with Students and Faculty members (in
case of existing Institutions), in addition to the recording of other details. The Institute shall
also arrange Laptop/Desktop with Internet facility, Scanner and Printer to the Expert Visit
Committee (only in offline mode)
The Expert Visit Committee shall submit the following to the Approval Bureau(Only if conducted
in offline mode):
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 36
--- Page 52 ---
1. Its visit Report in the prescribed format.
2.  Attested Copies of all documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
3. Video recording of the Expert Visit Committee during visit.
4. Attendance sheet duly signed/ digitally authenticated by the members of the Expert
Visit Committee and representatives of Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company present
during the visit.
5. | The Approval Bureau at AICTE shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Expert Visit
Committee Report are filled completely.
6. The scanning and uploading of the Expert Visit Committee Report including the Video
recording shall be done by the Approval Bureau, AICTE.
The report of the Expert Visit Committee/Show Cause notice, if issued shall be placed before
the Standing Hearing Committee. The schedule of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be
notified on the Web-Portal.
2.26 Verification of Compliance through Standing Hearing Committee
a.
Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting
documents before the Standing Hearing Committee.
The recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for approval. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded in the
Web-Portal by a detailed Speaking Order.
If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall
have the right to appeal once as per Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.27. Appeal Procedure
a.
As per the provision laid down in Clause 2.26 (c), an Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the
decision of the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal once to the Council within
7 days from the date of uploading of the decision.
The Appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee. The
appeal schedule shall be notified on the Web-Portal.
Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of Standing Appellate Committee and not
to remain absent in view of the stern time limit given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Hence,
the Applicants are instructed to be prepared with the supporting documents in proof of the
compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the Committee, even in case of short
notice.
The Report of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed along with the observations of
the Approval Bureau, if any, before the Standing Appellate Committee on the date and time
scheduled by AICTE. An Officer of the Council concerned shall assist the Committee and place
relevant records and documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for
the conduct of the meetings; however, he/ she shall not be a part of the Committee.
Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting
documents before the Standing Appellate Committee.
The concerned Officer in Approval Bureau shall ensure that all the fields of all the Reports are
filled completely.
The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 37
--- Page 53 ---
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
2.28 Grant of Approval
2.28.1
2.28.2
2.28.3
2.28.4
2.28.5
2.28.6
The applications submitted under Clause 2.3.2 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be
processed as per the procedure specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The consolidated
list of all the Institutions with the “Approved Intake” shall be placed by the Approval Bureau
before the Executive Committee/ Council for the grant of Extension of Approval as applicable
for the Technical Institutions to continue to conduct Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).
The decisions taken by the Executive Committee are ratified by the Council.
The same shall be notified on the Web-Portal. Further the Institution shall download the
Extension of the approval letter along with “Approved Intake” through the Institution login.
If deficiencies are noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee for the applications for Change
of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ to start new Programme/
Level/ Merger of the Institutions, the same shall be forwarded to Approval Bureau for further
processing. The Approval Bureau, AICTE shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Scrutiny
/ Rescrutiny / Expert Visit Committee Report are filled completely. The recommendations of
the Approval Bureau along with reports shall be placed before the Executive Committee for
approval or otherwise. An Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive
Committee, shall appeal as per Clause 2.27 of this Chapter and the final decision of the Council
shall be uploaded on portal as per the Academic Calendar Applications for Conversion of
Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice versa/Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-
ed Institution and vice-versa/ to start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions, if
rejected by Council shall be processed for Extension of Approval. However, the deficiencies
noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee shall be fulfilled before the issue of
EoA for the next Academic Year.
Applicants, whose applications are recommended for the Conversion of Diploma Level
into Degree Level/ Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution/ Closing one
Programme and starting another Programme shall create the Security Deposit for the balance
amount of the Security Deposit created earlier, as per the requirements of the Approval Process
Handbook for the remaining period of 10 years, as applicable. No deposit is required where
NOC was already issued to the Institution for the release of the earlier FDR.
Applicants for starting new Programme/ Level (except Government/ Government aided
Institutions) whose applications are recommended for Approval by the Executive Committee
shall be informed for the creation of Security Deposit.
Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount to AICTE as applicable as per Clause 1.9 (c) of
the Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall submit the payment proof of the Security
Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation to the AICTE, else
a penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed up to 31** May
and 31% July of the Calendar Year respectively, beyond which the approval shall be withdrawn.
The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years. The interest
accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities,
Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships to students, etc.
The Principal amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the
term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as
shall be decided on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any violation of norms,
conditions, and requirements/Non-Performance by the Institution/Complaints against the
Institution.
All approvals and speaking order, if any shall be uploaded on portal as per the Academic
Calendar.
Extension of Approval shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in Academic
Calendar
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 39
--- Page 54 ---
2.28.7
2.28.8
2.28.9
2.28.10
Institutional information shall be updated on the AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for
downloading the Extension of Approval letter.
Student's eligibility for admission shall be as per Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions shall follow the Academic Calendar as per Appendix 19 of the Approval Process
Handbook.
Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal before 30th September of the
Calendar Year.
Submission of applications (All the Institutions need to submit application as per the schedule
mentioned in Public Notice / AICTE Web portal)
The applications eligible to submit “Year round” shall also make online payment of the
Particulars (Category-1) Processing Period of Application
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s) As per Public Notice Period
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa As per Public Notice Period
Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or As per Public Notice Period
Type of Institution (except Institution(s) converted into a University)
To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions As per Public Notice Period
Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating As per Public Notice Period
in the same Campus / City
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the As per Public Notice Period
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign As per Public Notice Period
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in
Gulf Countries.
Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) As per Public Notice Period
Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management As per Public Notice Period
Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of Collaboration and Twinning Programme As per Public Notice Period
NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications in above categories shall be as per Public Notice (Will
have specified deadline for the submission of application).
Particulars (Category - 2) Processing Period of Application
Change of Site/ Location Year round
Closure of the Institution Year round
Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa Year round
Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s) Year round
Change in the Minority Status of the Institution Year round
Change in the Bank Details Year round
Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company Year round
Extended EoA Year round
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a Deemed-to-be-University) Year round
Online Learning / Open and Distance Learning courses Year round [Processing will be
twice a year as per UGC timeline
NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications (including processing fee / TER charges as
applicable) in above categories shall be done Year Round.
TERCharges as per the Approval Process Handbook.
The applications submitted after the cut-off date mentioned in the Public Notice shall not
be processed during the current Academic Year, but shall be processed for the successive
Academic Year only.
Shifting of the Campus in case of “Change of Site/ Location” shall be done only during vacation
time.
2.30 No Institution shall offer Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) without approval of the Council.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 40
--- Page 55 ---
2.32
2.33
If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes without the approval of the Council, it shall be
declared as unapproved Institution and necessary punitive action shall be initiated as per Chapter VIII
of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.30.1 The Council shall maintain a list of unapproved Institutions based on the information received
and shall also inform the general public about the same from time to time.
a. Provided that any Technical Institution, which has already started without following AICTE
approval procedure, wishes to submit an application/proposal shall be considered as a
new Technical Institution. For such purpose, it shall apply as per the provisions of Chapter
| of the Approval Process Handbook.
b. The legal date of starting of the Institution shall be from the date of issue of the Letter of
Approval from AICTE.
c. Students, who are admitted PRIOR TO APPROVAL by the Council, shall not have any right
to re-admission and shall have to fulfil all the requirements for admission as prescribed by
the Competent Authority for admission.
2.30.2 The Institutions conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in Technical Education, in temporary
location or at location not approved by the Council shall be liable for action for Closure and
other appropriate action as per Regulations against defaulting Trust/ Society/ Company/
associated Individuals as the case maybe.
2.30.3. The Council shall inform respective State Government/ UT to initiate appropriate penal, civil/
criminal action against such defaulting Institutions/ Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated
Individuals as the case maybe.
2.30.4 In case, if such Institutions make a representation, then hearing shall be given to these
Institutions by the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE and decision shall be taken as
per the provisions in the Approval Process Handbook.
NO institution shall take partial approval of programs, i.e. institution running any program under the
purview of the Council shall mandatorily take approval for ALL such Programs. Institutions found in
violation shall be subjected to strict penal action as per Chapter VIII.
Annexure 15 clarifies a few of the common doubts arising to the Stakeholders.
All PGDM /PGCM Institutions shall run all their Courses in Standalone Mode Only. No other Programs/
Courses shall be permitted in the PGDM / PGCM institution.
All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions), the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in
Offline mode also. All the processing of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency
and Accountability. Signature of experts on the documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal
is not necessary if verified online.
State Public & Private Universities and Central Universities are also not required to take
AICTE approval as per the AICTE Act. However, some of the Universities are seeking
approval of AICTE for availing the benefits of AICTE Schemes/Initiatives as per the
prevailing policies/norms.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 41
--- Page 56 ---
CHAPTER-III
Student Exchange Programmes/Twinning Programmes, Joint Degree Programmes
and Dual Degree Programmes between Indian and Foreign University/ Institution
or between two Indian Institutions in the field of Technical Education, Research
and Training
AICTE accords approval to Technical Institutions for conducting courses through collaborative programs with
reputed Universities/ Higher Educational Institutions(HEls) in India/ Foreign Countries.
The Collaborative academic programmes are categorised as follows:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Student Exchange Programme: Under this programme, students from HEls are allowed to study
in one of the partner institutions within the country or abroad to complete a portion of the course
or internship. A student exchange program may / may not involve physical presence of the student
in the partner institution. The students shall return to their parent institution to complete the
requirements leading to the award of degree. The student exchange programme is expected to be
typically of one or two semesters.
Twinning Programme: A Twinning Programme is a programme offered through an agreement/
partnership between two Higher Education Institution, which allows students to complete a portion
of the course at one Higher Education Institution and go on to complete the rest of the course at the
Partner Higher Education Institution.Under twinning programme, credits earned by the students
at Partner Foreign / Indian Higher Educational Institution shall be counted towards the degree
awarded by the parent Indian Higher Educational Institution. Under the Twinning Programme, the
degrees to be offered shall conform to the nomenclatures and duration of the degrees as specified
in the AICTE Approval Process Handbook (2023-24) and shall also conform to minimum eligibility
and other norms and standards to offer such degree programme.
However, credits earned by the student from the Foreign / Indian Higher Educational Institution
partnered for Twinning programme with an Indian Higher Education Institutions shall not exceed
30 percent of the total credits for the programme.
Joint Degree Programme: Under this programme, course curriculum shall be designed jointly by
the collaborating Universities/ Institutions and on successful completion of the programme, the
degree shall be awarded by the Higher Education Institution and the collaborative University/
Institution with a single certificate/degree.Under the Joint Degree Programme, the degrees to be
offered shall conform to the nomenclatures and duration of the degrees as specified in the AICTE
Approval Process Handbook (2023-24) and shall also conform to minimum eligibility and other
norms and standards to offer such degree programme.
Credits earned for the course(s) in an institution shall count towards the degrees jointly awarded by
both the institutions. The collaborating Higher Educational Institutions shall ensure that the credits
earned by the students shall not overlap course contents/curriculum and the student shall appear
for only one examination / evaluation process for each of the courses by the Higher Education
Institution in which he/she has registered for that course.
Dual Degree Programme: Under this programme, course curriculum shall be designed jointly by
the collaborating Universities/ Institutions in the same discipline/ subject area and at the same level.
Prospective students should meet the admission requirements of both the Universities/ Institutions
and shall apply to and be admitted separately to both the Universities/ Institutions.
The degree/ certificate for such programme shall be conferred by the both the Institutions separately
and simultaneously on successfully completing the degree requirements of both the Universities/
Institutions.The degrees for such programme shall be conferred by both Higher Educational
Institutions, separately and simultaneously, upon completion of degree requirements of both
the Institutions. This shall not in any way be considered as two degree programmes in separate
disciplines/subject areas and/or levels being pursued simultaneously. Under the Dual Degree
Programme, the degrees to be offered shall conform to the nomenclatures and duration of the
degrees as specified in the AICTE Approval Process Handbook (2023-24) and shall also conform to
minimum eligibility and other norms and standards to offer such degree programme. Prospective
students must meet the admission requirements of both the Higher Educational Institutions and
shall apply to and be admitted separately to both the Institutions.
AICTE & cen APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 42
--- Page 57 ---
3.1
3.2
Objectives
a.
To facilitate academic collaboration for exchange of students, twinning programmes, joint degree
programmes and dual degree programmes between Indian and Foreign Universities / Institutions
in the field of Technical Education, Research and Training.
To encourage Collaboration and Twinning between AICTE approved Institutions and Institutes of
Repute in India/ Foreign Countriesin the field of Technical Education, Research and Training.
To safeguard the interest of the student community in India and ensure uniform maintenance of
norms and standards as prescribed by various Statutory Bodies.
To ensure accountability for all such educational activities by Foreign Universities/ Institutions in
India.
To safeguard against entry of Foreign Universities/ Institutions that are non-accredited in the
country of origin, to impart Technical Education in India.
To safeguard the nation’s interest and take punitive measures, wherever necessary, against the
erring Institutions.
Requirements and Eligibility
a.
An Institution or State/ Central / Institution Deemed to be / State Private University which is already
in existence and duly approved by the Council, interested in imparting Technical Education leading
to the award of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree
of a University/ Institution through Collaborative/Twinning arrangements, provided there is “Nil
Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.
The Indian Institution should have its NBA accreditation with 650 marks and above valid beyond
10th April of the forthcoming Calendar Year in the Programme/Course for which Collaboration is
sought. In case of State/ Central / Institution Deemed to be / State Private University having its
programmes approved by the Council, it should have NAAC Score of 3.01 and above.
Accreditation by the authorized agency in the parent country or figured within Top 1000 rank in
the QS/THE ranking shall be the pre-requisite for any Foreign University or Institution to engage in
collaborative programme with Indian University/Institute.
The Educational Programmes to be conducted in India by Foreign Universities or Institutions leading
to the award of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/Post Graduate Degree
Level (Only for regular courses conducted in physical mode) shall have the same nomenclature
as it exists in the Approval Process Handbook. There shall not be any distinction in the academic
curriculum, mode of delivery, pattern of examination, etc. and such Diploma/Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree should be fully recognized in their Parent
Country.
Any Course or Programme, which jeopardizes the National interest, shall not be allowed to be
offered in India.
The Council shall prescribe any other condition for registration, expedient to do so in the overall
interest of the Technical Education system in the Country.
The Indian Partner Institution should obtain an NOC from the affiliating University/Board
(Not applicable to standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ University
Departments).
Both the Institutions shall enter into a bipartite agreement/ MoU for the purpose of collaboration.
The Indian Institutions shall enter into a bipartite agreement with its affiliating body.
For Course(s) where University/ Board approval is not mandatory, both the Institutions shall enter
into a bipartite agreement/ MoU for this purpose.
AICTE &% APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 43
--- Page 58 ---
k. | Credits earned by the students shall not exceed 30% of the total credits under Twinning Programme
and joint degree programme. For Dual degree programme, students must earn atleast 30% of the
total credits from Indian University/ Institution.
|. | The students failing to secure Visa should be enrolled in a similar Programme being conducted
by the Indian Partner Institution, affiliated to a University/ Board. The Intake of such students
shall be over and above the “Approved Intake” of the Programme being conducted by the Indian
Partner Institution. The colleges fulfilling the norms at envisaged in this chapter for possible grant
of approval for Twinning programmes / Foreign Collaborations / Join Degree / Dual Degree shall
be granted and additional batch subject to a maximum approved intake of 60.
m. The eligible Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Collaboration Programme shall
apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17 of Approval
Process Handbook.
n. The concerned University/ Institution shall have to comply with other requirements as specified in
AICTE/ UGC regulations while submitting the proposal for approval.
3.3 Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal www. aicte-
india.org failing which, the application shall not be considered. Applications shall be accepted
subject to realization of the Payment.
b. TER Charges for different types of Institutions for Introduction and Continuation of Twinning
Programme(s) is as follows:
Type of Institution Introduction (= in Lakh) Continuation (= in Lakh)
i Minority Institution/ Institution set up in J&K/
Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ Institution set 8.3 3.3
up exclusively for Women/ PwBD
ii |Government/Government aided Institutions/ Nil Nil
Central/ State University
iii | All other Institutions 11.0 5.5
NOTE: 10% TER charges will be increased annually.
3.4 Procedure
The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee,as per Clause 1.6 shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Collaboration and Twinning Programme.
3.5 Lateral Entry and supernumerary seats shall not be allowed in Foreign Collaboration and Twinning
Programme.
3.6 — Thelnstitution shall submit/ upload an Annual Report giving details of the number of students admitted,
Programme(s) conducted, total Fee collected, amount transferred to the Parent Country, investment
made, number of students awarded Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post
Graduate Degree and any other information that the Council shall ask for.
3.7 The Council shall cause an Inspection through EVC, whenever necessary, with or without prior notice,
to assess the Infrastructural and other facilities available/ to verify the compliance of conditions, Norms,
Standards etc. prescribed by the Council from time to time.
3.8 | Degree/Diploma shall be awarded as per the provisions prescribed by AICTE/ UGC on the subject as
amended from time to time.
3.9 (a) Collaboration under these programmes shall be allowed with Foreign University having ranking
within the top 1000 as per the latest QS/ THE world ranking or with an Indian University/ Institution
which falls under the following category:
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 44
--- Page 59 ---
3.10
3.11
(ii)
(iii
Accredited by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council or any other agency authorised
in this behalf with minimum score of 3.01 on a 4-point scale (Applicable only for Central / State/
Institution Deemed to be / State Private University).
or
With NBA accreditation with at least 650 points on a scale of 1,000
or
Which figures in the top-100 of AICTE approved Institutes in the respective category of National
Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) at the time of application
Collaboration and Twinning shall also be allowed between AICTE approved Institutions (having
valid NBA accredited courses) with an Institute of National Importance passed by an Act of
Parliament or any other AICTE approved Institutes having valid NBA accredited courses or which
figures in the top-100 in the respective category of NIRF.
Violation of any norms as envisaged by the Council shall lead to punitive action including Withdrawal
of Approval for the Institute/University.
Institutions/Universities shall fulfil all terms and conditions as prescribed by Ministry of External affairs
& MoE from time to time, in addition to the Standards & Norms set by the AICTE.
Admission and Fee
a.
Competent Authority for admission shall be the same as for regular admission and shall fetch a list
of Technical Institutions who have sought approval from the Council.
The Competent Authority for admission shall display the availability of collaboration and Twinning
Programme seats, course/ branch wise, in various Institutions, for information of candidates
during all stages of admission so that the students can freely exercise their informed choice. The
Institutions shall publish on their Brochure and Web site, the number of collaboration and Twinning
Programme seats available in the Course(s) / Division(s).
Competent Authority for admission shall prepare a merit list of Applicants by inviting applications
from eligible collaboration and Twinning Programme students and admit strictly on merit basis.
Aletter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each beneficiary.
Students admitted under this scheme shall not be allowed to change Institution / Course under
any circumstances.
The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their Websites for
information to the students and other stake holders.
The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates to be
admitted under collaboration and Twinning Programme seats.
AICTE &% APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 45
--- Page 60 ---
CHAPTER-IV
Grant of Approval for Universities
4.1
4.2
Introduction
a.
The higher Education system in India includes both Private and Public Universities. Public
Universities are supported by the Government of India and by the State Governments, while
Private Universities are mostly supported by various trusts and Societies. Universities in India
are recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC), in accordance with the UGC Act,
1956. The types of Universities include:
i. Central Universities which are established by an Act of Parliament and are under the
purview of MoE.
ii. State Universities are run by the concerned State Government/ Union Territories of India
and are established by an Act enacted by the legislative assembly of the respective State/
UT. University shall also have “Constituent College’, an Institution/ Department/ College/
School as a part of the University.
iii. Institutions Deemed to be University is an Institution for Higher Education so declared on
the recommendations of the University Grants Commission by the Central Government,
under Section 3 of the UGC Act.
iv. State Private Universities are established by State, recognized by the UGC and supported
by various trusts and Societies.These universities can grant degrees.
All categories of Universities have to maintain standards, higher than the minimum standards
related to infrastructure, Faculty and other norms specified by the UGC, AICTE Approval Process
Handbook and the statutory bodies concerned.
Clause 11 of the AICTE Act, 1987 mandates this Council to conduct inspection to ascertain that
a University is maintaining the norms and standards of teaching, examination and research.
Central/State and Private Universities may apply for AICTE’s approval by applying online
providing requisite details of infrastructure, land, faculty etc. as specified on the AICTE Approval
Process Handbook.
Off-Campus of the University is a Campus established by it and approved by UGC, outside the
main campus (within or outside the State) operated and maintained as its constituent unit,
having the University’s compliment of facilities, Faculty and staff.
Area of jurisdiction of State Universities/Private Universities/Institutions Deemed to be
Universities shall be as approved by the UGC/ State jurisdiction.
Applicants shall submit the application on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org.
The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall also adhere to the existing Central, State and
Local Laws.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Course(s)/Programme(s) shall not
admit students without prior approval of the Council.
NOTE: Universities /Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall NOT be permitted to run PGDM/
PGCM course(s) along with other programs. However, Universities running such programs shall
be required to convert the same into regular degree programme in Management i.e. MBA
Time Schedule for Processing of Applications
a.
AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website from time to time, inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and
processing thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall
be final and binding. To process any request from the Universities regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not accepted.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 46
--- Page 61 ---
b.
The submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal and payment shall not be later than the
last date as notified in the Public Notice/AICTE Website.
4.3 Seeking Approval of the Council
4.3.1
4.3.2
4.3.3
Application for the various categories mentioned in Chapter |, Il and Ill of the Approval
Process Handbook for Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/ Post Diploma
Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level for
conducting Programmes in Engineering and Technology, Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and
Design, Hotel Management and Catering Technology, MCA and Management.
NOTE: Council shall NOT grant approval for any integrated programme/course which requires
approval from different regulatory bodies.
Requirements and Eligibility
a. Notification issued by the Government under Central/ State Act declaring an Institution
as a Central/ State/ Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a
Deemed to be University.
b. The Central / State / Private / Institution Deemed to be University shall be a registered
Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/ Secretary of
Society or a Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to
time or any other relevant Acts through the Chairman/Secretary of the Trust or a Company
established under Section 8 of Companies Act, 2013 or Central or State Government/ UT
Administration or by a Society or a Trust registered with them.
c. Provided that the members/ Trustees/ promoters of a managing Trust/ Society/ Company
of an Institution Deemed to be University, not being controlled by Government/ UT,
shall not be directly or indirectly connected with the members/ Trustees/ promoters of a
managing Trust/ Society/Company.
In all the above cases, Universities seeking approval for the first time from AICTE shall submit
an online application through web portal as a new Technical Institution for all their existing
Technical Programme(s) and Course(s). University having Multiple Campuses/ Off Campuses/
Constituent Colleges shall apply separately for approval in respect of each campus/off campus/
constituent college.
All Universities (Central/State Government/State Private) and Category-| Deemed to be
University shall be permitted to run courses/ nomenclatures which may not be available in
AICTE APH as per autonomy granted to these Universities by the UGC.
The Central / State / Private Universities are taking approval from AICTE for some of the
selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake which is creating confusion to the students.
Therefore, the Central / State / Private Universities, which are interested in obtaining AICTE
approval shall have to obtain approval for all the Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) / intake
and not just for few selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake (at any level) after
fulfilling the mandatory requirement of AICTE norms notified from time to time.
As regards, Institutions Deemed to be Universities, it is mandatory to have AICTE approval from
the Academic Year 2018-19 in compliance with the Hon’ble Supreme Court Order dated 03-11-
2017 passed in CA No.17869- 17870/2017. Itis found that some of the Deemed to be Universities
yet to take AICTE approval or have taken approval partially for selected Technical Course(s)/
Programme(s)/ Intake (at any level). Therefore, Institutions Deemed to be Universities which
have never taken approval from AICTE are directed NOT to run any Technical Programme(s)/
Course(s) without prior approval of AICTE.
NOTE: Application for partial approval of any Programme(s)/Course(s)/Intake at any level shall
NOT be permitted.
4.4 Submission of Application
44.1
USER ID and Password
a. A unique USER ID and Password shall be allotted to each new application on payment of
= 5500/- (Rupees Five Thousand Five Hundred Only), through the payment gateway on
AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 47
--- Page 62 ---
The Universities already approved by AICTE shall use the USER credentials allotted to
them previously.
If any University has forgotten the Password, the University shall apply online. Technical
Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of %5500/- (Rupees Five Thousand Five Hundred
Only) shall be made through the payment gate way on AICTE Web-Portal. The proof of
payment and an Affidavit 1 for”Forgotten Password” shall be submitted to the concerned
Regional Office. Regional Officer shall verify the same from the web portal for allotment of
Password to the Applicants.
Using the USER ID Account, the application in the prescribed Format shall be filled and
submitted on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org A unique application number will
be generated on the successful submission of application. Using this application number,
the Applicant shall be able to track the status of the application at various stages of
processing.
44.2. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
Gh
Existing Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree / Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree applying for the
grant of approval for the first time:
University set up exclusively for Women
SI. No. Type of University *TER Charges Z in Lakh
i Central University/ State University/ Institution Deemed to Nil
be University (Government)
ii Institution Deemed to be University (Private)/State Private 8.8
University
iii University set up in J&K/ Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ 6.6
iv ALL Applicants under (ii) whose application was rejected and 3.3
issued Final LoR in the last Academic Year **
* Separate TER Charges shall be applicable in case of main and off campus as approved by UGC
** Not applicable for Applications, which were, rejected in preceding year and TER Charges refunded to the applicant as per the clause
1.4.2(g) & 1.4.7(b)
NOTE: 10% TER charges will increased annually
b.
In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional online Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (inclusive of the
Court directions to any type of Institution /University other than Central/State Universities
/Institution deemed to be university (Government)), then the Applicant has to remit $0.55
Lakh through online mode as an additional TER Charges.
In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional (online / Physical) Expert Visit Committee
has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions other
than Central/State Universities/Institution deemed to be university (Government)), the
Applicant has to remit = 1.1 Lakh for Online and & 2.2 Lakh for physical EVC, through
online mode as an additional TER Charges.
The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.
Only those applications submitted (including payment) within the cut-off date as
mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall be considered for processing.
4.4.3 All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited is correct. Facility to edit the data will
be available until the submission of the application by pressing the “submit” tab.
After pressing the “submit” tab, the modification of data shall not be allowed till the processing
of application is completed. Hence, applicants shall exercise utmost caution before final
submission of the application by pressing the “submit” tab.
Submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as mentioned in
the Public Notice/ AICTE Website is MANDATORY.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 48
--- Page 63 ---
4.5
444
44.5
44.6
4.4.7
An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner
on 100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed (Using DSC) &
uploaded on AICTE Portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions,
civil and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.
A printout of the complete online application (for categories falling under Chapter | of the
Approval Process Handbook) as submitted on AICTE Web-Portal, along with the proof of
payment, and documents mentioned as per Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust shall be submitted on the date of Scrutiny
are to be uploaded on AICTE Web-portal with digital signature, (in case of online), failing which
the Scrutiny shall not be conducted.
Applications submitted for the categories mentioned under Chapter II and III shall submit/
upload the documents as applicable in Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Applications complete in all respects shall ONLY be processed.
Grant of Approval
4.5.1
4.5.2
4.5.3
4.5.4
Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the built-up area as required and has its
Lawful possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company/
Institution or on long term lease on or before the date of submission of application.
Further to that it shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed
University to mortgage the Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of Letter
of Approval (LoA), only for raising the resources for the purpose of development of the
University situated on that Land.
b. University shall fulfill ALL the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Further that, the Institution Deemed to be Universities shall also have to fulfil the norms
as per UGC Regulations and statutory body concerned.
c. Buildings for the First Year of the Programme(s) should be completed in all respect as per
the Infrastructure requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Building
Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the University shall be prepared by an
Architect registered with Council of Architecture/Licensed Survey or and shall be approved
by the Competent Authority as designated by the concerned State Government/UT.
d. The Head of the “University” shall be named as “Vice Chancellor” having qualifications as
per UGC norms.
The Applicants shall not use name of the University in such a way that the abbreviated form
of the name of the University becomes IIM/IIT/IISc/NIT/IISER/IIIT/IIEST/AICTE/UGC/ MoE/Gol.
The Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government, India, Indian, National, All India,
All India Council, Commission anywhere in the name of the University and other names as
prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided
that, the restrictions mentioned above shall not be applicable, if the University is established
by Government of India or its name is approved by the Government of India.
The Applicant shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal for all the Technical Programme(s) as approved
by UGC for Approval.
Procedure
The application shall be processed as per Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 of the Approval Process Handbook
(Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee). The date of visit shall be communicated through system
generatede-mail. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area as per the norms required to
conduct all the existing Course(s).
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 49
--- Page 64 ---
4.6 Evaluation of the Applications
a)
b)
Universities in Category I/Il as per UGC (Categorization of Universities (Only) for grant of Graded
Autonomy) Regulations, 2018;
Universities other than Category I/II, running technical programme but coming for AICTE’s
approval for the first time;
Universities other than Category I/II, running AICTE approved technical programme and
desirous to apply for various categories in accordance with Chapter Il.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities falling under Category | or Il or other than Category
lorll
For ALL the above (i) to (iv), the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the following documents only:
NAAC Certificate indicating score letter issued by UGC declaring the status of the University for
Category I/Il and other (If applicable)
Notification issued by the Government under Central /State Act declaring an institution as a
Central /State/Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a Deemed
to be University.
UGC approval letter(s) for the main Campus and Off Campuses if any.
Affidavit 2 and Affidavit 5 (Universities shall have to adhere to norms and standards specified
by AICTE from time to time.
In case the above documents are not uploaded on portal, the University may be directed
to upload the same on the portal within the stipulated time. The formation of Scrutiny /
Re-Scrutiny committee and verification of the aforesaid documents will be online.
The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee will be constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval
Process Handbook by the Approval Bureau at AICTE by the selection of members through
automated selection process on AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable to attend or refuses or is incapacitated to take part in the
Committee, then Approval Bureau shall opt to choose another expert from approved panel of
the experts from the portal.
The date and time for Scrutiny shall be informed by the Approval Bureau.
Concerned Officer of the Council shall assist the Committee and place relevant records and
documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the
meetings; however, he/she shall not be part of the Committee.
Two representatives of the Applicant shall be invited to present their case along with the
supporting documents before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee. Self-attested Photo ID
proof and an authorization letter from the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company
shall be produced to the Committee.
NOTE: For Category I/ Il Universities applying for other domains (for e.g. Medical University),
applying for approval of Engineering and Technology Programme shall be processed similar to
a new Technical Institutions provided the university is already running courses in Engineering
and Technology.
To consider the Off Campuses/ Constituent Colleges of Category |/ Il Universities, UGC Letter
as well as NAAC mentioning to that effect shall be produced, else the applications shall be
processed as per Clause 4.5.4 of the Approval Process Handbook
Applicants falling under Category | & Il and other than category | & Il shall upload all self-
attested copies as per Appendix 16 (as applicable) of the Approval Process Handbook and
UGC approval Letter(s) for the Main Campus and Off Campuses, if any, with digital signature
(in case of online). Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 50
--- Page 65 ---
4.7
absent at the time of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny. TER Charges per campus to be charged as per
Table 4.4.2 (ii).
The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the
Application as mentioned above. Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee,
the deficiencies, if any, shall be communicated to the Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company
through Web-Portal.
Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny
shall be eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by the
Approval Bureau .
The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify only the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
Committee as per the norms and standards. The Approval Bureau shall ensure and certify that
all the fields of the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny Committee Report are filled completely.
Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee in case of Applicants falling under Category I/Il and other than category | / II shall
be forwarded to Approval Bureau to place before Executive council for recommendation of
issue of LoA.
Grant of Approval shall be as per Clause 1.9 of the Approval Process Handbook
a.
The Executive Committee after considering the recommendations and views of the Approval
Bureau shall take decision to grant of approval or otherwise. The decisions of the Executive
Committee shall be ratified by the Council.
The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form of
a Letter of Approval (LoA) or Letter of Rejection (LoR) with the specific reasons for rejection of
the application.
Applicants (except Central University/State University/Institution Deemed to be University
(Government)) whose applications are recommended for Letter of Approval (LoA) by the
Executive Committee shall be informed for submission of Security Deposit as applicable as per
Clause 1.9(C) of the Approval Process Handbook
i. Central University/ State University/ /Institution Deemed to be University (Government)/
are not required to pay the Security Deposit.
ii. Private Universities/ Institution Deemed to be University (Private) which were in existence
for more than 10 years with UGC are EXEMPTED from the payment of Security Deposit,
else the University shall pay the Security Deposit for 10 Years as per Approval Process
Handbook.
iii. If any University is starting a new Programme/ Level shall create the Security Deposit
as per the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook, even if the University is in
existence for more than 10 years with UGC.
iv. Universities which were granted approval from AICTE earlier as a Technical Institution and
created Security Deposit and got released after the maturity period are not required to pay
the Security Deposit; else the University shall pay the Security Deposit for the remaining
period of 10 years, as applicable.
The amount deposited by the University shall remain with the Council. The interest accrued
on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities, Quality
Improvement Programme for Faculty members and giving Scholarships to students.
The Principal amount ONLY shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion
of the term. However, the term of the deposited amount can be extended for a further period
as shall be decided on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any violation of norms,
conditions, and requirements and/ or Non-Performance by the University and/ or Complaints
against the University.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 51
--- Page 66 ---
4.8
4.9
An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has
passed out, to verify the fulfilment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
If the application for the new Institution Deemed to be University/University is rejected at the
Level of Scrutiny/Re- Scrutiny and the appeal provision is not availed, the TER Charges after a
deduction of %0.5 Lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.
The Council shall normally not grant Conditional Approval to any University.
The University/Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of Executive Committee, shall appeal as
per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook and the final decision of the Council shall be
uploaded as per the Academic Calendar.
Faculty shall be made available as per the norms, standards and conditions prescribed by the
Council from time to time.
A final Letter of Approval/ Letter of Rejection with the reasons for rejection of the application
shall be issued to the University through Web-Portal as per the Academic Calendar.
LoA shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Universities granted approval for offering Technical Programme at Diploma/Post Diploma
Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall
submit an application to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of Course(s) offered by
the University.
Applications submitted for other Categories in Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook
a.
The requirements, eligibility and procedure shall be as per the concerned Clauses of Chapter
II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Expert Visit Committee for the Introduction
of supernumerary seats for OCI/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries for Category I/II Universities shall be exempted.
Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges.
Type of University TER Charges ¢ in Lakh
i Central / State / Institution Deemed to be Nil
University (Government)
ii State Private/ Institution Deemed to be Corresponding TER Charges as mentioned in
University (Private) Chapter I/II/ Ill
In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing Hearing
Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court
directions to any type of Institutions), then the Applicant has to remit = 0.55 Lakh through
online mode as an additional TER Charges.
In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee has to be conducted
(inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the Applicant has to remit =1.1
Lakh through online mode as an additional TER Charges.
The applications shall be processed as per the procedure specified in the Approval Process
Handbook and the Executive Committee/ Council shall grant Extension of Approval as
applicable for the Universities to continue for conduct of Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).
The decisions taken by the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.
The decision of the Council shall be included in the issuance of Extension of Approval and
uploaded on the Web-Portal and the Universities shall download the same through their login
id. Speaking orders (in case of reduction in Intake, No Admission, etc.) shall be uploaded on the
Web-Portal not later than the date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 52
--- Page 67 ---
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18
4.19
Increase in Intake/ New Course shall be processed as per Clause 2.14 of Chapter Il of the Approval
Process Handbook. The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as
specified in Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Programme(s) approved by the Council,
falling under Category I/II as per UGC (Categorization of Universities (Only) for grant of Graded
Autonomy) Regulations, 2018 shall have to submit an application to the Council indicating the
increase in Intake in the Courses/New Course(s)in Emerging /Multidisciplinary areas. The Council shall
be granting approval to those Programmes/ Courses. However, such Universities shall have to update
the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply with the norms and standards as specified by
AICTE from time to time. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to
UGC with this effect.
If any complaintsisreceived about violation of the norms, AICTE shall inspect the University and inform
UGC to take appropriate action. In case of Institution Deemed to be University, the action as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to UGC.
Extension of Approval shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
Institutional information shall be updated on AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for downloading the
Extension of Approval letter.
Students’ eligibility for admission shall be as per Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Institutions shall follow the Academic Calendar as per Appendix 19 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Student enrolment details shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal before 30" September of the Calendar
Year (As per revised Academic Calendar 2023-24 ).
Board of Governors (BoG)/Board of Management (BoM) shall be constituted for the Institution Deemed
to be University (Private)/ State Private University. BoM of Universities shall be as per the Acts and
Statutes of UGC. The minutes of the meetings shall be uploaded periodically on the website of the
Universities.
The Universities shall display on their web site the mandatory disclosure including students admitted,
their Fee structure, Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Programme, Refund Policies.
To maintain a high standard in Technical Education, the Universities shall adopt quality measures such
as revision of Curricula in tune with the changing trends in the industrial development, performing
Academic Audit, conducting innovative academic and sponsored research, publishing papers in
refereed journals and apply for granting Patents.
Institutions Deemed to be Universities that have been recognized as an Institute of Eminence by the
Ministry of Education, Government of India shall be exempted from the annual approval Process and
accorded approvals for offering Technical Programmes/ Courses. However, such Universities shall have
to update the data on AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply with the norms and standards
as specified by AICTE from time to time. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and
Affidavit 5 to UGC to this effect. If any complaint is received about the violation of the norms, AICTE shall
inspect the University and inform the MoE and UGC to take appropriate action. In case of Institution
Deemed to be University, the action as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated
and informed to the MoE and UGC.
An Institution (Deemed to be University) found running a technical programme without prior
approval of the council shall be liable for appropriate penal action as per Chapter VIII.
NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be conducted preferably in online
mode. Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions) the
Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be conducted in Offline mode also. Proceedings of the
Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny shall be recorded to have Transparency and Accountability.
Signature of experts on documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal is
not necessary if verified online.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 53
--- Page 68 ---
CHAPTER-V
Open and Distance Learning (ODL)/Online Learning (OL)
for Standalone lnstitutions, Institutions Deemed tobe Universities and Universities
(Central, State Public or State Private)
5.1 Introduction
a. The National Education Policy (NEP)- 2020 has laid emphasis on increasing Gross Enrolment
Ratio (GER) through the use of technology and ICT. To fulfil the objectives of NEP- 2020 and
to promote ODL and Online Education, AICTE has framed comprehensive Guidelines for
imparting Education through the said mode. All India Council for Technical Education (Open
and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021, shall apply to
Standalone Institutions, Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities (Central, State
Public and State Private) for all the Courses of learning at the Post Graduate Certificate/ Post
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level programmes in Management, Computer
Applications, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Logistics and Travel & Tourism.
b. The Council shall NOT allow Open and Distance Learning at Diploma/Degree/ Post Graduate
Degree in Engineering and Technology,Planning, Hotel Management and Catering Technology,
Applied Arts and Crafts, and Design Programmes, except mentioned explicitly in the ODL/OL
guidelines.
c As per the UGC (Open and Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulations
2020, NOC of respective regulatory body is necessary for running the programmes of that
domain and accordingly Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities shall take NOC
/ approval of AICTE and also necessarily shall take the approval of UGC in order to actually
run the programme. In respect of autonomous colleges, UGC regulations on the subject shall
prevail.
d. The NAAC score as per the guidelines notified by UGC from time to time shall be applicable
for the Institution(s) Deemed to be University and Universities (Central, State Public or State
Private) in respect of grant of approval to run programmes/ courses under ODL and Online.
e. The NBA score as per the guidelines notified by AICTE from time to time shall be applicable for
the Standalone institutions for grant of approval to run programmes /courses under ODL and
Online.
5.2. Norms and Requirements
5.2.1 The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities (Central,
State Public or State Private) intending to run Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode
and / or online mode shall submit an application to the Council for the Academic year and
subsequent years for NOC / Approval / Extension of Approval for the Courses approved/
Increase/ reduction in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of new Course(s)/ Closure
of Course(s).
5.2.2 NO Institution (Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University
(Central, State Public or State Private) shall offer a technical Programme/ Course in Open and
Distance Learning / online mode and admit students without prior NOC / approval of the
Council.
5.2.3. Learner’s enrolment:
a. Learner's enrolment (for Open and Distance Learning mode): A Learner residing in
any part of the Country may enroll in any programme being offered by an Institution
recognized by the AICTE for offering programme under Open and Distance Learning
mode provided that the Institution shall conduct all activities such as admissions, contact
programmes, examinations etc. for learner strictly within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Institution as specified in these regulations. The total number of Learners admitted at any
Learner Support Centre shall not exceed 1000 at any time, subject to fulfilment of other
conditions as prescribed in AICTE-APH. In case the enrolment is higher than 1000 at a
Learner Support Centre, the number of positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on
pro-rata basis.
*Subject to the revised regulations of UGC
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 54
--- Page 69 ---
b. Learner's enrolment (for Online mode): A Learner residing within or outside India may
enroll in any programme being offered by an Institution recognized by the AICTE for
offering programme under Online mode.
5.2.4 Academic and Administrative Requirements
a. A Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/University (Central,
State Public or State private) shall have a designated Centre of Distance Education at
Headquarters for operationalising the Programmes/Courses in Open and Distance
Learning mode / online mode, which shall be headed by a regular functionary not
below the rank of a Professor and shall have the following positions on Full Time and
dedicated basis, excluding the designated positions in the Open Universities as per their
respective Act(s), along with the infrastructural facilities. In addition to the Headquarters,
an Institution may have a Learner Support Centre(s).
If the Institution is intending to operate the Headquarters as Learner Support Centre,
an intake upto 10000 Learners shall be permitted. In case, the enrolment is higher than
10000 at Headquarters, the number of positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on
a pro-rata basis.
Academic and Administrative Requirements at Headquarters (upto 10000 students)
Staff requirements Number
1 |Head for each discipline at Professor Level 1
2  |Minimum Academic staff strength per discipline or specialization or Course
Associate Professor 1
Assistant Professor 2
3 |Administrative staff strength at the Institution
Deputy Registrar 1
Assistant Registrar 1
Section Officer iI
Assistants 3
Computer Operator 2
Multi-Tasking Staff 2
b. The total number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre shall not exceed
1000 at any time, subject to fulfillment of other conditions as specified in the AICTE (Open
and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021. In case the
enrolment is higher than 1000 at a Learner Support Centre, the number of positions and
Infrastructure shall be increased on pro-rata basis.
Academic and Administrative Requirements of each Learning Supporting Centre
(upto 1000 students)
Staff requirements Number
1 Assistant Professor (Coordinator) 1
2 | Counsellor per Theory Course of 4 Credits 2
3 | Supervisor per Practical Course of 2 Credits 1
4 Computer Operator 1
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 55
--- Page 70 ---
5.2.5
Infrastructure Requirements
The Institution shall have necessary infrastructure and support system for offering the
Courses in Open and Distance Learning Mode and / or Online Mode.
Minimum Infrastructure Requirements for ODL/Online (For both Institution Headquarters and
Learner Support Centre*)
SI. No. Type of Built-up Area Percentage (%) Headquarters Learner Support
inSqm Centre’ in Sqm
1 |Academic Area 50 696.8 66
Administrative Area 10 139.4 13.2
Academic support such as Library,
Reading Room, Computer Centre,
Informational and Communication 30 418.0 39.6
Technology Laboratories, Video and
Audio Laboratories, etc.
4  |Amenities or other support facilities
NGA 10 139.4 13.2
5 |Minimum Built-up area for Open and Distance Learning 1393.6 132
activity
5.2.6
# There is NO requirement for a Learner Support centre to run Online Mode.
The Institution shall use additional Laboratory facilities of the parent Institution or any
another AICTE approved Institution offering similar Course/ Programme.
Each Learner Support Centre shall have a minimum Built-up area of 132 Sq m on the
basisthat it shall have at least one Class room for the interaction with the Learners.
Minimum Internet Speed required at Headquarters/ Learner Support Centre is 100 Mbps.
The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the differently abled
students and elderly persons comprising Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others including
parents of the students visiting the Institution. Barrier Free Built Environment for differently
abled / elderly persons shall be available in the Buildings, including the availability of
specially designed toilets for Ladies and Gents.
Every Building should have at least one entrance accessible to the differently abled and
shall be indicated with a proper signage. The entrance shall be approached through a
ramp together with the stepped entry. Refer guidelines and space standards for Barrier
Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons by CPWD, Ministry of Urban
Development, and Government of India. (Refer Handbook on Barrier free and Accessibility
http://cpwd.gov.in).
All teaching-learning facilities for differently abled Learners shall be provided in the
Ground Floor itself. Toilets with all facilities shall be provided in each floor or at least in
the Ground Floor at Headquarters as well as Learner Support Centres as specified by the
National Building Code.
Safety and security measures at all the Learner Support Centres and Headquarters to
safeguard Students, Staff and the general Campus community from the threat of violence,
and to provide appropriate interventions to support individuals in crisis shall be ensured.
The minimum requirement for Built-up Area shall be fulfilled as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook as amended from time to time
Maintenance of infrastructure, academic and other quality standards by Standalone Institution/
Institution Deemed to be University shall be as per the respective Part Ill of AICTE (Open and
AICTE S APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 56
--- Page 71 ---
5.2.7
By PR}
5.2.9
Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021(As amended from time
to time).
Admission, Examinations and Learner Support shall be as per the respective Part IV of AICTE
(Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021 (As amended
from time to time).
Assessment, Accreditation, Audit, Inspection and Monitoring shall be as per the respective
Part V of AICTE (Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines,
2021 (As amended from time to time).
Norms for Intake
. The Standalone Institution, Institution Deemed to be University and University (Central,
State Public or State Private) shall apply for the Programmes/ Courses as per Clause 5.1 at
Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree Levels with the
proposed Intake in Headquarters and/ or each Learner Support Centre.
The Council shall grant approval/NOC for the Courses along with their Approved Intake
in each Learner Support Centre, subject to the fulfilment of AICTE (Open and Distance
Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines by the Headquarters and the
number of Learner Support Centres through the Procedure specified in this Chapter.
The “Approved Intake” for ODL / Online Programmes / Courses shall be as per the UGC
(Open and Distance Learning mode and Online Learning Mode) regulations dated 4th
September 2020 and as amended from time to time.
Courses offered in ODL/OL Mode
SI.No. Programme / Course Nomenclature of Degree / Diploma / Certificate
1. Management Master of Business Administration (MBA) / Post Graduate Diploma in
Management (PGDM) / Post Graduate Certificate (PGCM)
2. Computer Applications | Master of Computer Application (MCA) / Post Graduate Diploma in
Computer Application (PGDCA) / Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
3. Artificial Intelligence Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
and Data Science
4. Logistics Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
5. Travel and Tourism Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
5.2.10 The Headquarters and each Learner Support Centre of Standalone Institution/ Institution
Deemed to be University/ University (Central, State Public or State Private) shall establish
Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Anti Ragging Committee, Grievance Redressal
Committee and Internal Committee (IC), SC/ST Committee as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
5.2.11 All Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities (Central, State
Public or State Private) shall upload the Transcripts and Certificates of all students enrolled, Year
wise and Course wise for all Learner Support Centres (if applicable) including Headquarters on
National Academic Depository (NAD).
5.2.12 In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected
from the student, after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) shall be refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions
to retain the School/ Institution Leaving Certificates in original.
In case, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the vacated seat is consequently filled
by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must refund the Fee collected
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only)
and proportionate deductions of Fee, where applicable.
The same shall be affected to the students admitted in July/ January session, as applicable.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 57
--- Page 72 ---
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.2.13 The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities (Central, State
Public or State Private) shall display in their Website the mandatory disclosure as specified in
the Guidelines including the nomenclature of the Courses and Approved Intake, students
admitted, their Fee structure, Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Course, Refund
Policy, etc. in each Learner Support Centre including headquarter.
Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, as applicable to the
Headquarters and each Learner Supporting Centre shall be digitally signed and uploaded on AICTE
Web-portal and original copy to be shown to the Scrutiny Committee.
Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, as applicable to the
Headquarters and each Learner Supporting Centre shall be digitally signed and uploaded on AICTE
Web-portal and original copy to be shown to Expert Visit Committee.
Time schedule for Processing Applications
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and processing thereof.
The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/AICTE Web-site shall be final and binding. To
process any request from the standalone institutions/Universities regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not valid.
b. The submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal and payment of TER Charges shall not
be later than the last date as notified in the Public Notice.
C Universities (Central, State Public or State Private) which are outside the purview of AICTE, can
make Online applications round the year. However, their application shall be processed only
when UGC notifies the same for that academic session.
Seeking Approval of the Council
5.6.1 Requirements and Eligibility
a. The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities)
or Standalone Institutions, may apply for offering programmes through the Open and
Distance Learning mode and/ or Online mode, courses in the field of Management and
allied areas, Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Logistics and
Travel & Tourism who fulfil the following conditions, namely:
|. Universities (Central, State Public or Private)/ Institution Deemed to be University having
NAAC score of 3.26 and above on a 4-point scale;
OR
Universities (Central, State Public or Private)/ Institutions Deemed to be University having
a rank in Top-100 in the University category of National Institutional Ranking Framework
(NIRF), at least twice in three preceding cycles (at the time of application).
OR
The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities),
which are in existence for minimum five years with at least two batches passed out and
having NAAC score of 3.01 on a 4-point scale; subject to the condition that they shall
achieve a NAAC score of 3.26 or above in the forthcoming applicable cycle.
ll. Standalone Institutions having a NBA Score of 700 on a scale of 1000;
OR
Shall be in the top-100 in the institution category in the National Institutional Ranking
Framework at least once in last 2 preceding cycles as per UGC/AICTE Gazette notification
(at the time of application)
OR
Standalone Institutions which are in existence for minimum 5 years with at least 2 batches
passed out and having NBA accreditation with points between 650 points to 699 points
on a scale of 1,000; subject to the condition that they shall achieve a NBA score of 700 or
above in the forthcoming applicable cycle.
NOTE: However, all such Universities (Central, State Public or State Private), Institutions
Deemed to be Universities / Standalone Institutions shall be required to submit
the desired information regarding Faculty / Students admission data annually and
comply with all the provisions of the Guidelines and shall be required to submit an
affidavit to the AICTE.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 58
--- Page 73 ---
Further, above Universities (Central, State Public or State Private)/ Institutions-Deemed to
be Universities / Standalone Institutions shall be required to submit an online application
on AICTE Web-portal and comply with all provisions mentioned in the Guidelines.
b. Open Universities may run ODL/ Online programmes only in the courses permitted by AICTE
from time to time, provided they meet all the requirements of the guidelines of AICTE.
NOTE: However, these Universities shall be required to register on AICTE web portal to
submit the desired information regarding Faculty /Students admission data annually and
shall be required to submit an affidavit to the AICTE.
c. The University (Central, State Public or State Private) / Standalone Institution shall have
necessary Infrastructure, Faculty and Support System for offering the Courses in Open
and Distance Learning mode/ online mode in Management, Computer Applications,
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, Logistics, and Travel and Tourism.
d. The University (Central, State Public or State Private) / Institutions Deemed to be
University/ Standalone Institution shall have been running the above-mentioned Courses
in the conventional mode of classroom teaching.
NOTE: Affiliated Colleges / Institutions are NOT eligible to offer/conduct ANY program in
Open and Distance Learning /Online mode.
5.6.2 The existing Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University (Central,
State Public or State Private) shall use their existing Login ID and Password for submission of
online application in the format specified by the AICTE.
5.6.3. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
a. TER Charges & in Lakh for Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities
and Universities (Central, State Public or State Private) offering Courses at Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level in Open and Distance Education Learning and
Online Learning mode are given below:
SI. Standalone Institutions/ Institution Deemedtobe TER Charges?inLakhforODL TER Charges @ in
No. University/ University * (Open and Distance Learning) Lakh for OL (Online
Courses Learning) courses
New application from Standalone Institution/ Private 8.8 8.8
University/Institution Deemed to be University
(Headquarters and up to 2 Learner Support Centres
for the total Intake up to 10000 seats)
2 |New application by the Existing AICTE approved 1.1 1.1
Institutions running either ODL or OL Courses (Intake
up to 1000 seats)
3 | Each additional Learner Support Centre (Intake up to 3.3 Not Applicable
1000 seats)
Extension of Approval (for every 1000 seats) 0.55 0.55
5 |Increase in Intake in the Courses (for every 1000 0.55 0.55
seats)
6 |Introduction of new Course(s) in Learner Support 2.2 2.2
Centre concerned or Headquarters
7 | Closure of Course(s) Nil Nil
Reduction in Intake/ Change in the Name of the 0.11 0.11
Course(s) for each Learner Support Centre or
Headquarters
8 |All applicants under (1) whose applications were 2.2 2.2
rejected and issued Final LoR in the preceding year**
*Not Applicable for Government and Government Universities.
** Not applicable for Applications which were rejected in last preceding year and TER
Charges refunded.
NOTE: The total number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre shall not
exceed 1000 at any time. In case of applied/ Approved Intake (as applicable) is higher than
1000 at a Learner Support Centre, accordingly the number of Learner Support Centre
(Intake in multiples of 1000) shall be considered for calculating TER Charges.
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 59
--- Page 74 ---
5.6.4
5.6.5
5.6.6
5.6.7
b. Inanextraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee/additional Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (Inclusive of the
Court directions to any type of Institutions), then the Applicant has to remit Rs 0.55 Lakh
through online as an additional TER Charges.
c. Inanextraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee (Online / Physical)
has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the
Applicant has to remit 71.1 Lakh for online and %2.2 Lakh for Physical, through online
mode as an additional TER Charges.
The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.
d. Only those applications submitted within the cut-off date, including payment shall be
considered for processing.
e. Incase of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be
refunded to the Applicant.
f. Applications rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal
provision, the TER Charges after a deduction of = 0.55 Lakh shall be refunded to the
Applicant/ Institution.
All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered / edited are correct. Facility to edit the data is
available until the submission of the application by pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.
After pressing the “SUBMIT” tab, the data entered is not allowed for any further editing till the
processing of the application is completed. Applicants shall exercise utmost caution before
pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.
Application should be submitted on AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as notified in
the Public Notice/AICTE Web-site.
A copy of such application shall be displayed on the Website of the Standalone Institution/
Institution Deemed to be University and University (Central, State Public or State Private) by
way of Self-Disclosure
a. The application shall be accompanied by evidence of having prepared the self-learning
materials required for the Courses of study, duly approved by the statutory bodies of the
Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University (Central, State
Public or State Private) empowered to decide on academic matters.
b. The application shall be accompanied by evidence of availability of ODL / Online Learning
resources adequate for effective delivery of all the proposed Courses of study and the
expected enrolment of students.
The application shall be accompanied by evidence of the preparedness for establishing
Learner Support Centres, providing Learning Support Services, establishing Centre for
Internal Quality Assurance, availability of academic and other staff in the Unit and Learner
Support Centres of the Institution, availability of qualified Counsellors in the Learner
Support Centers meeting such standards of competence as specified in Annexure IV
of AICTE-Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education Guidelines,
Examination Centres and the administrative arrangements for supportive services for
effective delivery of Open and Distance Learning.
All Applicants shall submit/upload an Affidavit 13 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate
or Notary or an Oath Commissioner on =100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper. In
case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, both civil and/ or criminal as
per the Regulations in place.
Procedure
a. The application for establishment of Headquarters/ Learner Support Centers shall be
processed as per Clause 1.11 (Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee) followed by an Expert Visit
Committee [only for Standalone Institutions / Institutions Deemed-to-be-Universities], if
required as per Clause 2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook. The date of visit shall be
communicated through e-mail/AICTE Web-portal. The Council shall not grant approval to
Learner Support Centre(s) without the approval for Headquarters.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 60
--- Page 75 ---
Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities (Central,
State Public or State Private) meeting the eligibility criteria as per clause 5.6.1 shall
have to submit an application to the Council indicating the ODL and/or Online Courses/
increase in Intake in the Courses/ New Course(s).
However, such Standalone Institutions and Institutions Deemed to be Universities and
Universities (Central, State Public or State Private) shall have to update the data in AICTE
Web-Portal on annual basis and comply the norms and standardsas specified by AICTE
from time to time. Standalone Institutions shall have to submit an Affidavit 13 annually
to AICTE. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 13 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to
UGC to this effect. If any complaints are received about the violation of the norms, AICTE
shall inspect the Institution/ University and the action as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook shall be initiated and informed to the UGC about the Institution Deemed to be
University and University (Central, State Public or State Private).
The Standing Hearing Committee shall recommend the Applied Intake or appropriate
Intake/ reject the application, based on the observation of the Expert Visit Committee
and the compliance of the deficiencies by the Institution.
Where the Institution Deemed to be University/ University (Central, State Public or State
Private) has made an application for offering Courses in Open and Distance Learning
mode, not withstanding that in respect of such Courses, UGC had caused the inspection
of the Institution in the past or prior to coming into force of the Guidelines, the AICTE
may cause an_ inspection, in respect of such Courses, of the Institution Deemed to be
University at its discretion through an Expert Visit Committee.
The consolidated list of all the Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be
Universities and Universities (Central, State Public or State Private) with the “Approved
Intake” shall be placed by the Approval Bureau before the Executive Committee/ Council for
the grant of Letter of Approval/Letter of Recommendation (in case of Institutions Deemed
to be Universities and Universities (Central, State Public or State Private), as applicable.
The decisions taken by the Executive Committee after ratification by the Council shall be
notified on the Web-Portal. Further, the Institution shall download the Letter of Approval/
Letter of Recommendation along with “Approved Intake” through the Institution login.
Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount to AICTE as applicable as per Clause 1.9
(b) of the Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall submit the payment proof of
the Security Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation to
the concerned Regional Office, else a penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security
Deposit shall be imposed up to 31%t May and 31st July of the Calendar Year respectively,
beyond which the approval shall be withdrawn.
The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years.
The interest accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional
Development activities, Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving
Scholarships to students, etc.
The principal amount ONLY shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on
completion of the term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended
for a further period as shall be decided on a case to case basis and/ or forfeited in
case of any violation of norms, conditions, and requirements/ Non-Performance by the
Institution/ Complaints against the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be
University.
Provided that while passing an order, where the AICTE does not grant approval in
respect of one or more Courses, the AICTE shall specify the grounds of such refusal
in the order.
Provided further that before passing an order, AICTE shall provide a reasonable
opportunity to the concerned Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be
University and University (Central, State Public or State Private) of being heard including
an appeal as specified in the Clause 5.8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 61
--- Page 76 ---
5.7
e. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form
of a Letter of Approval (LoA) (in case of first approval)/ Letter of Recommendation (in case
of Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities (Central, State Public or State
Private), Extension of Approval (in case of already approved) or Letter of Rejection (LoR)
with specific reasons for rejection of the application.
f. | The Council shall normally NOT grant Conditional Approval to any Institution.
g. AnApplicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal as per
Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook and the same shall be processed as per
the procedure specified therein.
h. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the
Council whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
All approvals shall be uploaded on the AICTE webportal against the Institute ID including
speaking orders, if any. LoA/ EoA shall not be granted after the last date as mentioned in the
Academic calendar. Penal Action in case of Violations of the Guidelines
a.
Where the Council, on its own motion or on any representation received from any person, or
any information received from any authority or a statutory body, or on the basis of any enquiry
or inspection conducted by it, satisfied that a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to
be University/ University has contravened any of the provisions of the Guidelines and orders
made or issued there under, or has submitted or produced any information and documentary
evidence which is found to be false at any stage or any condition subject to which recognition
has been granted, it may withdraw the approval of such Standalone Institution/ Institution
Deemed to be University and University (Central, State Public or State Private) in respect of
such Courses as it may specify, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Provided that no such order against the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be
University/ University (Central, State Public or State Private) shall be passed unless a reasonable
opportunity for making representation against the proposed order has been given to such
Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University.
Provided further that, the order of withdrawing or refusing approval passed by the AICTE shall
come into force with immediate effect.
If a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University (Central, State
Public or State Private) offers any Course in ODL and/ or Online mode after the coming into
force of the order withdrawing approval or where a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed
to be University/ University(Central, State Public or State Private) offering a Course in ODL
and/ or Online mode before the commencement of the Guidelines, fails to obtain approval
under the Guidelines for offering Courses in ODL and/ or Online mode for academic session
immediately after the notification of Guidelines and subsequent academic sessions, the
Diploma/ Post Diploma/ Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma obtained pursuant
to such Courses shall NOT be treated as a valid qualification.
In the event of any Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University
(Central, State Public or State Private)found offering Courses in ODL and/ or Online mode
without the approval of the AICTE or in violation of any of the provisions of these Guidelines or
orders made there under, shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions
by the Council.
. Issue Show Cause Notice or withdraw the approval for an Academic Year/ upto a
maximum of next five Academic Years/ permanently.
. In case a Learner Support Centre fails to adhere to the prescribed norms or guidelines,
the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University shall initiate
action for closure of the centre by following due procedures, so that interest of learners
is taken care through some alternative arrangement.
AICTE & cen APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 62
--- Page 77 ---
5.8
5.9
The Institution shall be declared as unapproved Institution and the same shall
be displayed in the AICTE Web-Portal and communicated to the respective State
Government.
Lodge a First Information Report against the officials or management of the errant
Standalone Institution to take action as per the law.
Withhold or debar from receiving funding from AICTE.
In case of Institution Deemed to be University and University (Central, State Public or
State Private), the action as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated
and informed to UGC and MoE.
d) In case of any violation of the above said norms, the same shall be processed as per Chapter VIII
of the Approval Process Handbook.
Appeal Procedure
a. Any Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University (Central, State
Public or State Private) aggrieved by an order of withdrawal of approval may prefer an appeal
to the AICTE within a period of 15 days.
b. The Appeal of the Institution (as above) shall be considered by the Standing Appellate
Committee.
c Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company
or Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with
Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents
before the Standing Appellate Committee.
d. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the ODL/OL Courses shall be the same as specified by
UGC on the subject from time-to-time.
The students shall be admitted TWICE in an Academic Year within the Approved Intake for each Course
as specified in the guidelines.
Students’ enrollment data in all the Learner Support Centres shall be uploaded to AICTE Web-Portal
within one month from the last date for admission every year. If it is not uploaded, the Council shall
not grant approval to the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University
(Central, State Public or State Private) in the next Academic Year.
The Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and Universities (Central, State Public or
State Private) shall create a separate Department/ School/ Centre as Headquarters for offering Courses
in ODL and/ or Online mode.
The Institutions shall mandatorily mention the details of Headquarters, enrollment number allotted
to each student by AICTE and the mode of study as Open Distance Learning Education/Online
Education Learning in their Diploma/ Degree Certificate and mark sheets as per the format available in
AICTE Portal.
As per the UGC (Open and Distance Learning mode and Online Learning Mode) regulations dated
Ath September 2020, the definition of “Professional Programmes” means a Programme other than
Programmes in Engineering, Medicine, Dental, Pharmacy, Nursing, Architecture, Physiotherapy and
Programmes not permitted to be offered in distance mode by any Statutory Councils or Regulatory
Authorities to be conducted by the Higher Educational Institutions under Open and Distance Learning
mode or Distance Education mode for the purpose of these Regulations, if any, should be considered
only if the same are approved by the respective Statutory Councils or Regulatory Authorities.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 63
--- Page 78 ---
Accordingly, if any State/ Central/ Private University approaches the Council for offering Technical
Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode and/or Online mode, their application shall be processed
as per the norms and procedure specified in this Chapter and the AICTE (Open and Distance Learning
Education and Online Education) Guidelines 2021, the decision of the Council shall be forwarded
to UGC.
Extension of Approval/ Increase/ Reduction in Intake/ Introduction of New Course(s)/ Closure of
Course(s)/ Change in the Name of the Course(s)
a) NOC / Approval to the Universities will be issued for a period of 5 years on submission of
application on the portal as per the Academic Calendar. EoA for Deemed-to-be-Universities also
shall be issued for 5 years on payment of requisite TER Charges based on seat intake. However,
for any increase or decrease or closure of course, Deemed-to-be-Universities shall apply on
the portal as per the Academic Calendar. The Standalone Institutions shall submit an online
application to the Council through the web portal every year for the Extension of Approval of the
Courses as per schedule mentioned in the public notice / AICTE Website.
In case of increase in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of new Course(s)/ exceeding
the maximum number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre, the application shall
be considered upon verification of adequate facilities in the concerned Learner Support Centre(s)
by an Expert Visit Committee as per Clause 2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook.
In case of Closure of Course(s)/Change in the Name of the Course(s) at any Learner Support
Centre, the application shall be considered by a Scrutiny Committee as per Clause 2.24 of the
Approval Process Handbook. The applicable TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment
gateway on AICTE Web-Portal within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be
considered.
b) The Institutions may apply for non-zero reduction in Intake by themselves in AICTE Web-Portal
and maintain the norms accordingly.
©) The Institutions shall apply for increase in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of new
Course(s) upto the maximum number of Learners permitted at any Learner Support Centre by
themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain the norms accordingly.
Provided that, if any Institution propose to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not available
in Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence, as the case may be, by the
Council for the same shall be necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution with due endorsement
by the Registrar/ Director of affiliating University/ Technical Institution shall submit detailed Syllabus
and Curriculum and its nomenclature to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE before
30thSeptember of the Calendar Year, to process the same in the respective Board.
NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted preferably in
online mode. Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions)
the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Offline mode also.
Proceedings of the Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have
Transparency and Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/
uploaded by Institute on portal is not necessary if verified online
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 64
--- Page 79 ---
CHAPTER-VI
Vocational Courses under NSQF
Vocational Education can be defined as the education based on occupation and employment. It involves
various practical trainings. It may be referred as technical education because the trainee directly develops
expertise in a particular group of skills and techniques. Vocational Education prepares individuals for job,
makes them perform better by honouring their skills, thus specializing them at their own Level. Vocational
education provides an intensive training and certification Programme and support the youth in gaining
appropriate employment, becoming entrepreneurs and creating appropriate knowledge.
6.1 National Skills Qualification Framework (NSQF)
a.
The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) is a competency-based framework that
organizes all qualifications according to a series of Levels of knowledge, skills and aptitude.
These Levels, graded from one to ten, are defined in terms of learning outcomes which the
learners must possess regardless of whether they are obtained through formal, Non-Formal or
informal learning.
Vocational Courses may be affiliated with existing University or any Skill University/ National
University having jurisdiction for affiliation/ Board of Technical Education as the case may be.
The D.Voc / B.Voc Programmes provide Diploma/ Undergraduate studies which would also
incorporate specific job roles and their Qualification Packs (QPs)/ National Occupational
Standards (NOSs) along with general education.
The Fee for the Vocational Courses shall be regulated by the respective state bodies/ Technical
Boards/ Universities or the case may be.
There will be essentially credit-based modular Programmes, where the credits for skill and
general education components will be permitted so as to enable multiple exit and entry. This
would enable the learner to seek employment after any Level of Award and join back as and
when feasible to upgrade his/her qualification/ skill competency either to move higher in his/
her job or in the higher educational system.
The curriculum in each of the years of the Programme would be a suitable mix of general
education and skill development components. The General Education Component shall have
40% of the total credits and balance 60% credits will be of Skill Component or as amended by
the MoE/ Ministry from time to time.
The Curriculum details should be approved by the respective Technical Board/ University.
Institution should focus on
i. The overall design of the skill development component along with the job roles selected
should be such that it leads to a comprehensive specialization in one or two domains.
ii. In case NOS is not available for a specific area/ job role, the university/college should
get the curriculum for this developed in consultation with industry experts.
iii. The curriculum should also focus on work-readiness in terms of skills in each of the
three years.
iv. Adequate attention needs to be given in curriculum design to practical work, on the
job training, development of student portfolios and project work.
The general education component of the curriculum will also be decided by the Board of Studies
of the concerned affiliating University/ Board. This should adhere to the normal university
standards. It should emphasis and offer Courses which provide holistic development. This may
also include the Course(s) which are supportive to core trade in addition to soft skills, IT skills,
and language proficiency and literature.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 65
--- Page 80 ---
o)
The student completes the skill modules as required at various certification Levels, one Level
at a time, acquires the necessary credits from the Skill Knowledge Provider (SKP) or Training
Provider/ Sector Skill Council approved by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) or
Government Agency or Industry and gives them on to the Institution where he/she is registered
for Diploma in Vocation (D.Voc) or Bachelor in Vocation (B.Voc)
These credits, along with the education component credits are transferred to the Technical
Board or the University as the case may be, which compiles the Vocational Skill credits and the
formal education credits. If all such credits are available as required by the certification Level,
then the Technical Board or the University shall award the certification at that Level.
All certification Levels of ‘Knowledge and Skill’ have been identified in Appendix 1.
Astudent entering a Vocational stream from general stream can enter at acertain Level provided
the skills required at that Level are acquired, from a registered SKP/Training Provider. A suitable
bridge Course where necessary may be run by the Institution for imparting the knowledge to
the student seeking Lateral Entry.
The qualification with upward mobility is given in SAMVAY Document accessible at: https://
www.aicte-india.org/sites/default/files/SAMVAY_1_.pdf.
The National Education Policy 2020 states that a candidate shall have freedom to move from
Vocational stream to current formal higher education stream or vice versa at various stages
including multi-Level entry and exit system subject to fulfilling the required criteria of the
affiliating body.
The Institution shall have to apply online on AICTE Web-Portal as per the calendar of
AICTE for seeking NOC.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 66
--- Page 81 ---
CHAPTER-VII
Norms and Requirements
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.3.1
7.3.2
The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the Technical Programmes such as Diploma/ Post
Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Levels
shall be as provided in the Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Any Foreign National who had obtained School Leaving Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in a Foreign
Institution shall produce an Equivalency Certificate issued by the Association of Indian Universities for
admission to an Institution/ University in India.
Regular Faculty / Employee with prior permission from the respective employer may pursue any course
under the level (Diploma / UG / PG/ PhD etc.) in regular mode outside the Office hours without availing
full time deputation / leave and such acquired qualification will be considered as valid for the purpose
of employment / promotion / higher studies.
The concerned State Government/ UT Admission Authority shall decide modalities for the admission.
The list of approved nomenclature of Courses at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Programmes in Engineering and Technology/
Planning/Applied Arts and Crafts/Design/Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ Computer
Application / Management shall be as provided in the Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Sandwich Courses are Degree/ Diploma Courses offered by an Institution that include a set period of
time working in a related Industry so that students get hands-on experience.
Provided that, if any Institution proposes to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not available in
Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence, as the case may be, by the Council
for the same shall be necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution with due endorsement by the
Registrar/ Director of affiliating University/ Board/ Technical Institution shall submit detailed Syllabus
and Curriculum and its nomenclature to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE before 30th
September of the Calendar Year, to process the same in the respective Board.
Allbranches of Engineering andTechnology shall offer Elective Coursesin the Emerging/Multidisciplinary
Areas viz., Artificial Intelligence (Al), Internet of Things (loT), Block chain, Robotics, Quantum Computing,
Data Sciences, Cyber Security, 3D Printing and Design, Augmented Reality/ Virtual Reality (AR/VR) etc.,
as specified in Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook.
a. Under Graduate Degree Courses in Emerging / Multidisciplinary Areas shall be allowed
as specialization from the same department. The minimum additional Credits for such
Courses shall be in the range of 18-20 (including credit transferred from the SWAYAM
platform) and the same shall be mentioned in the degree, as specialization in that
particular area. For example, doing extra credits for Robotics in Mechanical Engineering
shall earn B.E./B.Tech. (Hons.) Mechanical Engineering with specialization in Robotics.
b. Minor specialization may be allowed in any Under Graduate Degree Courses where a
student of another Department shall take the minimum additional Credits in the range
of 18-20 and get a degree with minor from another Department.
[c Universities are free to evolve their own Syllabus for any Minor Degree and Hons. for
which Model Syllabus is not available on AICTE’s Website.
d. If an Institution is having the required Infrastructure facilities, Faculty and other
requirements as per the Approval Process Handbook, for conducting the Core (Under
Graduate Degree) Courses, the specialization in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary Areas shall
be permitted Within the Approved Intake Without Hampering the Generic Course.
e. The Institutions/ Universities shall adopt the following important instruction while
offering the Hons. in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary Areas:
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 67
--- Page 82 ---
Minor Degree / Hons
Artificial Intelligence and
Machine Learning
To be offered as Hons., Only for following Major Disciplines (For
any other Major Disciplines which is not mentioned,
it may be offered as Minor Degree)
Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
2  |Blockchain Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
3 | Cyber Security Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
4 | Data Science Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
5 _|Internet of Things (loT) Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
6 | Virtual and Augmented Reality Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics Engineering
7 | Systems Engineering Electronics Engineering; Mechanical Engineering
8 |Control Systems and Sensors | Electronics Engineering; Instrumentation and Control Engineering
Technology
9 |GIS and Remote Sensing Electronics Engineering; Civil Engineering
10 _| Sustainability Engineering Civil Engineering
11 | Green Technology and Civil Engineering; Chemical Engineering
Sustainability Engineering
12 |Strategic Civil Infrastructure | Civil Engineering
13 | Coastal & Offshore Civil Engineering
Engineering
14 | Smart Cities Civil Engineering; Electronics Engineering
15 _| Construction Technology Civil Engineering
16 |Underground Space Utilization | Civil Engineering
17__| Computer Science & Biology _| Biotechnology; Computer Science
18 _| Biosimilar Technology Biotechnology; Chemical Engineering
19 |Genome Engineering and Biotechnology
Technology
20 | Precision Health Technology __| Biotechnology
21__|Waste Technology Chemical Engineering
22 | Energy Engineering Mechanical Engineering
23 | Electrical and Computer Electrical Engineering; Computer Science and Engineering
Engineering
24 |Mining and Mineral Mining Engineering
Processing
25 | Robotics Mechanical Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering;Electronics Engineering;
26 |3D Printing Mechanical Engineering; Civil Engineering
27 | Electric Vehicles Mechanical Engineering; Electrical Engineering
28 | Sensors Technology Electronics and Communication Engineering, Electronics Engineering,
Computer Science and Engineering, Instrumentation Engineering
29 | Microgrid Technologies Electrical Engineering
30 | Infrastructure Engineering Civil Engineering
31 | Environmental Geotechnology | Civil Engineering
32 | Earthquake Engineering Civil Engineering
33 | Waterways Transport Civil Engineering
Engineering
AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
68
--- Page 83 ---
34
Lean Construction Technology | Civil Engineering
35 | Organ Printing Technology Biotechnology
36 | Nutrition Technology Biotechnology
37 |Drug Engineering Biotechnology
38 | Aqua-food Technology Chemical Engineering; Biotechnology
39 | Cellular Agriculture Biotechnology
40 | Sustainable Energy Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
Engineering (SEE)
41 | Universal Human Values (UHV) | Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
42 |\Indian Knowledge System Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
(IKS)
43 | Advance Web Development ___| Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
44 | Innovation, Entrepreneurial and | Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
Venture Development
45 | VLSI Design & Technology Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
46 |5Gand Advanced Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
Technologies
47 | Business Development, Applicable to all UG programmes
Marketing and Finance
7.4 — Areas in which Minor Degree/Hons. may be offered are numerous. It is up to the Universities with the
help of their Academic Board/Council to decide whether Minor Degree/Hons. is to be offered or not in
any particular area, which is not mentioned above. AICTE approval is not required for offering Minor
Degree/Hons. in any such area, however the criteria that “Minor Degree or Hons. will cumulatively
require additional 18 to 20 credits in the specified area in addition to the credits essential for obtaining
the Under Graduate Degree in Major Discipline (i.e. 160 credits)”.
7.5 To maintain the quality of Education, 60% of the eligible courses in any Technical Institution shall be
accredited in the next ONE (1) years’ time, else EoA may not be issued by the Council.
7.6 The “Maximum Intake Allowed” in a new Technical Institution offering Technical Programme(s) at
Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree Level shall be as per the Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook. The same shall also be
applicable to an existing Institution WITHOUT NBA accreditation.
7.7 The Council shall permit the Introduction/ Continuation of NRI/ OCI /FN/ Children of Indian Workers in
the Gulf Countries seats ONLY in the Courses conducted in regular mode.
7.8 The Council shall not permit the Post Graduate Course(s) (except MCA and Management), if the
Institution is not offering an Under Graduate (Core) Course in the same Programme. However, the same
is permitted to State/ Central Universities or Autonomous Government Institutions offering only Post
Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology.
7.9 The Council shall NOT permit the conduct of PGDM Courses along with other Programs in the same
Institution.
7.10 In general, the teaching learning process shall take place either in the form of “face to face” mode in
a class room (Regular Course) or “Open and Distance Learning” mode by providing flexible learning
using a print, electronic, MOOCs, SWAYAM and SWAYAM PRABHA and through online and occasional
interactive face-to-face meetings.
The Courses offered in the timings of Regular Shift, Second Shift and Part Time shall be considered as
Courses conducted on Regular Mode. The Institutions shall have to fulfill all facilities such as
Infrastructure, Faculty and other requirements to offer the Courses on Regular Mode as per
the norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook 23-24 for the Total Approved Intake
and the Institutions may conduct the Courses in the timings as per the convenience of all
stakeholders. All such Institutions shall have to create the necessary Faculty, Infrastructure
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 69
--- Page 84 ---
7.13
and other facilities WITHIN 1 YEAR (by A/Y2023-24) to fulfil the norms and an affidavit
for the same shall have to be submitted to AICTE. Student enrolment details shall be uploaded
in the Web-Portal.
In the Technical Educational sector, Diploma in Engineering and Technology contributes a major
share with good enrolment at this level. The Diploma pass out students are employed in various sectors
of Industry.
Hence to facilitate such employed / working professionals, Council has made a special provision
by providing flexibility in timing to conduct theory and practical classes (even beyond office hours) so
as to upgrade their skills and knowledge. This will be treated as regular course not evening program /
part-time.
Working professionals with Diploma qualifications enrolled in regular undergraduate Programmes
shall be allowed to do the theory and practical in flexible timing to enrich their skills and knowledge.
Institute shall provide the required facility to the students under this type of enrollment. Institute shall
maintain the student-faculty ratio.
The Institutions may run Skill Development Courses, student developmental activities such as Research
Park, Start-up Centre, Innovation Club, Entrepreneurship, etc. in the excess Built-up area without
affecting the regular academic activities.
The AICTE approved Institutions shall be permitted to collaborate with each other for Student Exchange
Programme so that the students admitted in an Institution may spend one Semester in another
Institution.
Further, the institutions running courses of a specialized nature with more than 50 years of existence and
unable to modify/improve/change infrastructure (heritage building), such institutions’ infrastructural /
faculty etc. calculation shall be done on their “existing intake”. Such institutions shall NOT be subjected
to the prevalent norms of infrastructure as prescribed by the Council for other institutions. However, the
faculty norms for such institutions shall be kept on a pro-rata basis and not on the basis of division size
intake as prescribed in Appendix 3.
An Institution shall only allow up to 40% or as per the new regulation of UGC /AICTE of the total courses
being offered in a particular Programme in a Semester through the Online Learning courses provided
through SWAYAM/ MOOCs platform as per the AICTE (Credit Framework for online learning course
through SWAYAM) Regulations, 2016 as amended from time to time.This is not applicable in case of
Diploma LEVEL in Engineering and Technology Programme.
Institutes having less Enrolment / Poor Academic Performance
a) Institutions having less enrolment
Institutions having Course(s) in which admissions are less than 30% of the “Approved Intake” for
thepreceding 5 years consistently, and if in the following year, the admitted student strength
does not exceed 50% of the “Approved Intake” in the course(s) by filling vacant seats through
lateral entry, then the Council shall reduce the intake by 50%, in such Course(s) in the current
Academic Year.
In the Courses approved by the Council, if the Institution fails to admit the students/ not started the
Course(s) due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State Government/
UT requirements in the year of establishment, the same shall be informed to the Council, else ALL
the Courses shall be considered for implementing the above Clause.
The Institution falling under this category need not apply for restoration in the next Academic
Year and the Intake shall be automatically reinstated by the Council, if the enrolment becomes
more than 30% based on the student enrolment data provided by the Institution. However, such
Institutions shall not be eligible to apply for other categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of
the Approval Process Handbook except Extension of Approval.
Further, if such Institutions apply for restoration of Intake against the punitive action if any, in
the previous Academic Year(s) and if the earlier “Approved Intake” being restored through EVC
followed by SHC/ SAC, then this Clause shall be applied after five years.
b) Institutions having poor academic performance:
Institutes having poor academic performance in University/Board examinations, a joint decision
of respective affiliating University / Board along with AICTE shall be taken. The institute with poor
academic performance shall be given a warning to improve the academic performance of the
students within 2 years.
AICTE & =< APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 70
--- Page 85 ---
7.14
Admission to Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s)
a) Lateral Entry to Second Year Diploma Course(s) shall be permissible up to a maximum of 10% of
the “Approved Intake” which shall be over and above, supernumerary to the “Approved Intake’,
plus the unfilled vacancies of the First year as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
b) Lateral Entry to Second Year Under Graduate Degree Course as applicable in Appendix 1 shall be
permissible up to a maximum of 10% of the “Approved Intake” which shall be over and above,
supernumerary to the “Approved Intake’, plus the unfilled vacancies of the First year.
c) The Institution applied for Closure (if the same is under process/ approved for Progressive
Closure) are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year, as Extension
of Approval was issued in the previous Academic Year and students were admitted during
that year.
d) The Institutions where“No Admission” have been issued for the current Academic Year are eligible
for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year, as Extension of Approval was
issued in the previous Academic Year and students were admitted during that year. However, in
the Institutions where “No Admission” have been issued for the previous Academic Year are not
eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year.
e) Institutions applied for the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and vice-versa/
Conversion of Women’s Institution to Co-ed Institution and vice-versa and approved for the
conversion are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry as per the approval that of the previous
Academic Year.
f) — Any Foreign National obtained Diploma ina Foreign Institution (having an equivalency Certificate
issued by the Association of Indian Universities) or Diploma in an Indian Institution shall also be
eligible for Lateral Entry into the Second Year under Graduate Degree Course. The Institutions
having approval for the supernumerary seats in such Course(s) as per Clause 2.12 of the Approval
Process Handbook are ONLY eligible to admit the Foreign Nationals as per the norms, else the
Institution shall apply for the same on AICTE Web-Portal. However, the total Foreign Nationals
admitted under supernumerary seats and the Lateral Entry shall not exceed the 15% of the
“Approved Intake” in an Academic year.
g) _NRI candidates shall also be permitted for admission in Lateral Entry to Second Year, subject to
the approval from AICTE for the NRI seats and fulfilment of requisite norms as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook.
h) Vacant seats arising out of the students withdrawing the admission in the First Year shall also be
considered for Lateral Entry.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Faculty requirements and Cadre ratioin Under Graduate/
Post Graduate Level as provided in the Appendix 7 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Institutions shall ensure the timely and complete payment of the salary of Faculty by Electronic
Clearing Service through Nationalized Banks. Expert Visit Committee shall ensure the Faculty availability
by the annual salary paid statements of the faculty in addition to their physical presence.
The Institution should not demand for the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at the
time of joining the Institution. The Faculty members shall avoid the practice of leaving an Institution in
the middle of the semester without completing the Courses assigned to them in the Semester.
The institutions shall ensure that necessary addition/deletion of faculty ID (Details in case of new faculty
have not worked in any other AICTE approved institutions so far) on AICTE web portal within the same
month from the date of Joining/Leaving.
AICTE &% APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 71
--- Page 86 ---
7.16
a) Adjunct Faculty/ Industry expert / Professor of Practice shall be as per guidelines given in
Annexure 9 are permissible (up to a maximum as mentioned below), as the Programmes require
more practical exposure :
Design - 20%
Planning - 30%
In all other Programmes, ONLY under exigent conditions such as relieving/retirement of Faculty
members/ delay in Faculty recruitment, Institutions may avail the services of Adjunct Faculty/ Industry
expert/ Professor of Practice up to a maximum of 10% of the required Faculty members as per the
“Approved Intake’, for a period not exceeding one Academic Session. The Institutions may appoint
more number of Adjunct Faculty for the benefit of the students to get the Industrial exposure. One
Adjunct Faculty shall not be engaged in not more than two Institutions at the same time.
b) In order to offer Quality Technical Education, all the institutions need to have Regular faculty for
all the programs / courses by fulfilling Faculty student’s ratio & Cadre ratio as prescribed by AICTE
from time to time. However, the institutions may avail the services of contractual faculty under
extraordinary circumstances (Court Cases etc.,) ONLY for a short period.
c) The Faculty norms as specified in Appendix 7 of Approval Process Handbook shall be fulfilled for
the Course(s) conducted in any institution.
d) For every Post Graduate Course, there should be at least one Professor with Ph.D. qualification.
If Professor is not available, at least one Associate professor with Ph.D. qualification should be
available.
e) Faculty requirement for a Course may comprise of Faculty of Science and Humanities and other
interdisciplinary specialization depending on the University Curriculum.
f) | Number of Technical and Non-Teaching Staff depends on the Institution/ University/ concerned
Government norms.
g) Aadhaar/ PAN seeding has to be provided for the Faculty wherever applicable as per the Norms.
h) — The Technical Institutions shall introduce Biometric attendance for regular Faculty members.
i) Each Institution shall have appropriate Grievance Redressal mechanism/ Internal Complaint
Committee (ICC) to address the issues of the Faculty & Students.
Disclaimer:
Annexure 6 and 7 of the Approval Process Handbook provide the major domains and the corresponding
possible nomenclatures under each domain which is applicable to AICTE approved Institutions. Inter
disciplinary Courses are numerous and more firmly entrenched in the academy than ever. Such
Courses are being offered at various Universities, IITs, NITs, IISERs, NISERs and other Institutes of National
importance, other than the nomenclatures listed in the Approval Process Handbook and AICTE cannot
update all the existing nomenclatures. However, the recruiting authorities shall decide the equivalent
Course(s) based on the curricula and syllabus, without taking approval from AICTE, depending on the
needs of their Programme(s)/ Course(s).
The Technical Institutions shall follow Faculty Cadre and Qualifications as provided in the Appendix 8 of
the Approval Process Handbook.
The age of superannuation of all faculty members and Principal / Director of the Institutions shall be
65 years. An extension of 5 years (till the attainment of 70 years of age) may be given to those faculty
members who are physically fit, have written Technical Books, published papers and has average 3600
feedback of more than 8 out of 10 indicating them being active during last 3 preceding years of service.
All the pay related issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the concerned University or
State DTE (Refer AICTE Gazette notification: F.no. 1-103/AICTE/ PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated
224 March, 2021)
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 72
--- Page 87 ---
7.17 The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Built-up requirements as provided in Appendix 4 of
the Approval Process Handbook.
a)
Land required shall be with clear title in the name of the trust / society / company or on a long
term lease for the minimum period of 30 years with at least 25 years of live lease shall be in the
Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company.
Documents showing ownership of Land/ Building as per the provisions of Section 8 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the time being in force relating to transfer of property
to or by Companies, Associations or bodies of individuals, in the name of the Applicant in the
form of Registered Settlement Deed/ Registered Sale Deed/ Irrevocable Gift Deed (Registered)/
Irrevocable Government/ Private Lease Deed (Registered) for a period of minimum 30 years
(including Commitment for continued lease with at least live Lease of the maximum duration of
programs at the time of submission of application).
It shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed Institution to mortgage
the Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of the Letter of Approval (LOA), only for
raising the resources for the purpose of development of the Technical Institution situated on that
Land for improving the employability of students.
Plot(s) of Land under consideration shall be contiguous and shall have no obstacles such as river,
canals, rail tracks, highways, high tension lines or any such entity hampering continuity of Land.
In case, if the obstacles come later, connectivity shall be ensured and proper Safety Certificate
should be produced from Competent Authority.
The Land Use Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as designated by
concerned State Government/ UT.
The Land Conversion Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as designated
by concerned State Government/ UT.
The Land Classification Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as designated
by concerned State Government/ UT.
The Buildings has to be constructed as per the approved Building plan. In the existing Institutions,
the outer dimensions and outer envelope of the building, setbacks, vertical circulation position
of the toilets and circulation areas are to be kept intact; the minor internal changes made in the
plan may be accepted. However, major changes/ alterations that affect the structural stability of
the Building are not permitted.
Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D (as applicable) shall
be obtained from the Competent Authority (as per standard format prescribed by the issuing
Authority). For Government Buildings, the Government Building Act, 1899 is applicable.
After the expiry of a period of thirty years from the issue of Completion Certificate, a Structural
Stability Certificate from the registered Structural Engineer for the purpose of certifying that the
Building is safe for human habitation shall be produced. Structural Stability Certificate is valid for
a period of FIVE years from the date of issue.
In case of any modifications done in existing Building, stability of entire construction need to be
checked and also Building Plan need to be re-validated, in case of major changes.
A valid Fire Safety Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority.
State wise Competent Authorities for issuing the Certificates pertaining to the Land/ Building
including Occupancy Certificate are given in Annexure 8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 73
--- Page 88 ---
7.18 The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software, Internet,
Printers and Laboratory Equipment as provided in the Appendix 5 of the Approval Process Handbook.
7.19
The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Essential and Desirable requirements as provided in
the Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.
a)
d)
The Language Laboratory shall be used for Language tutorials. These are attended by students
who voluntarily opt for remedial English Classes. Lessons and exercises are recorded on a weekly
basis so that the students are exposed to a variety of listening and speaking drills. These especially
benefits students who are deficient in English and also aim at confidence-building for facing
interviews and competitive examinations. The Language Laboratory sessions also include word
games, quizzes, extemporary speaking, debates, skills, etc. Specifications shall be decided course
wise as mentioned in Appendix 4.2.1.
The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the physically challenged
students and elderly persons comprising of Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others such as parents of
the students visiting the Institution. Barrier Free Built Environment fordifferently abled / elderly
persons shall be available on all the floors and in ALL the Buildings, including the availability of
specially designed toilets for Ladies and Gents. Every Building should have at least one entrance
accessible to the physically challenged and shall be indicated with a proper signage. This entrance
shall be approached through a ramp together with the stepped entry. Refer guidelines and space
standards for Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons by CPWD, Ministry
of Urban Development, Government of India (Refer Handbook on Barrier free and Accessibility
http://cpwd.gov.in). Unisex toilets with all facilities shall be provided in each floor as specified by
the National Building Code.
Condition A: for Building up to 3 or 4 floors (for Buildings of height upto15 m)
The Lift may be provided, but not essential.
The ramp shall be provided as per National Building Code.
Condition B: If the Building is a multi-storied Building i.e. more than 4 floors (for Buildings of
height more than 15 m)
Lift must be provided with all provisions as per the National Building Code. Lift shall be
accessible to all disabled/ elderly persons and
Ramps may be provided, if needed, for the same.
Special reserved car parking facilities are to be provided.
Other types of Barrier Free Environment
Stair lifts: All Stair Lifts come standard with a switch or button at the armrest and a call/send
button mounted on the wall at the top or bottom of the stair case this allows multiple user
household's access to the unit as necessary.
Platform Lifts also known as “porch lifts” come in all shapes and sizes: Platform Lifts are ideal
for individuals that rely on wheelchairs, power chairs and scooters. Vertical Platform Lifts also
provide access to raised porches and decks for the wheel chair, power chair or scooter.
There are several types of hoisting systems such as Overhead Hoists, Portable Ceiling Lifts,
Mobile Floor Hoists and Wall Lift Hoists are also available.
Safety Certificate is essential.
Safety and Security measures in the Campus
The essential responsibility of Campus safety is to safeguard students, Staff, and the general
Campus community from the threat of violence, and to provide appropriate interventions to
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 74
--- Page 89 ---
7.20
7.21
7.27
7.28
support individuals in crisis. To ensure the safety in the Campus, the following measures shall be
available in the Institution:
CCTV shall be installed in the Campus at appropriate locations within the premises of an
Institution.
+ All Inhabitants/ Students/ Faculty/ Staff shall be issued Identity Cards by the Institution and
the same may be checked by the security personnel during their entry. Outsiders may be
permitted to enter into the Campus with the temporary photo ID generated at the entrance.
+ _ The staff shall be trained to protect the students from any abuse.
+ The Institution shall have at least an annual safety programme encouraging the Campus
community to look out for themselves and one another.
Special needs of students, Faculty and Staff with disabilities have to be taken care in the event
of an emergency.
Counseling arrangements for the affected individuals shall be provided.
e) Multiple Institutions in the same premises run by the same Trust/ Society/ Company shall be
permitted to share internet band width/ e-journals, but the sum total shall be equivalent to the
requirement of each of the Individual Institutions.
Induction training for 3 weeks and 2 weeks is mandatory for First Year UG and Diploma students
respectively.
Model Structure of the Curricula/ Syllabus for different Course(s) are proposed by the Council and
available in AICTE Web-Portal shall be used as a guideline and Institutions/ Universities may adopt the
same with suitable changes.
The Technical Institutions shall initiate MoUs with the Industries for the internships of the students and
report the outcomes of the same in their website. The industry with whom MoU is signed shall be a
registered industry having valid TIN/GST number.
The standalone PGDM Institutions shall follow Norms for PGDM Programmes as provided in the
Appendix 9 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Subscription of Journals as provided in the Appendix 10 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the establishment of a new Technical Institution shall be as
provided in the Appendix 11 of the Approval Process Handbook.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging as provided in the
Appendix 12 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Structure of Various Committees is given in the Appendix 13 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Contact details of AICTE are given at AICTE website www.aicte-india.org. The technical / process related
queries or grievances may be sent through CSS portal https://css.aicte-india.org/login.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Grievance Redressal for Students as provided in the Appendix 15
of the Approval Process Handbook.
Documents to be submitted for applications under Chapter | are given in Appendix 16 of the Approval
Process Handbook.
Documents to be submitted for applications under Chapter II/ Ill are given in Appendix 17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
Recommended Composition of Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) in the Technical
Institutions is given in the Appendix 18 of the Approval Process Handbook. Institutions Deemed to
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 75
--- Page 90 ---
7.33
7.39
7.40
7.41
7.42
7.43
be Universities shall fulfill the composition of Board of Governors/ Board of Management (BoM) as
specified by the AICTE and UGC.
The Technical Institutions shall follow Academic Calendar as specified in the Appendix 19 of the
Approval Process Handbook.
The Technical Institutions may conduct the Fellow Programme in Management as specified in the
Appendix 20 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Starting other academic Course(s)/ Institutions (Technical/ Non-Technical) in the excess Built-up area,
arising out of the Courses approved for Closure, not started, etc., is permissible. However, the Applicant
has to make Material/ Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan, Site Plan, etc. approved by the
concerned Competent Authority to suit the requirements of the new Programme.
The Institutions may also conduct any academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body using existing
facilities, or by creating additional facilities as per the provisions laid down in the norms and standards
of the respective Regulatory Bodies without affecting the quality of education prescribed by both
Regulatory Bodies after taking NOC from the Council. In such cases, a Scrutiny /Re-scrutiny Committee
shall be conducted for the issue of NOC on receipt of = 0.55 Lakh through online as TER Charges by the
Applicant. The Promoter has to provide an Affidavit 12 that the Institution(s) approved by AICTE in the
Campus has/ have all the facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel (if applicable), Faculty, etc. for meeting
the ALL the Courses, in addition to the proposed academic Course(s).
Ample space shall be made available for playground in an Institution. Institutions shall provide
owned/ hired facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or through
arrangements with other adjacent Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.
Total Built-Up area under each sub-category such as Instructional area, Administrative area, Amenities
area and Circulation area for each Programme shall be fulfilled. Built-Up area in excess than the total
Built-up area required to run the Programme (s) and Course(s) for the entire duration shall be utilized
for the student developmental activities such as Hostel, Research Park, Student Clubs and Incubator/
Accelerator.
Mandatory disclosures as given in the Annexure 10 shall be displayed in the website of each Technical
Institution.
The Institutions shall adopt the minimum standards and qualifications as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook. However, Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Institutions having Accreditation/
Autonomy status shall surpass the minimum standard and qualifications specified.
In National Defence/ Security areas, the maximum Divisions or Intake over and above specified in
Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be considered as the case may be, subject to the
fulfilment of other norms of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the details of such Institutions
may not be shared to the public.
The Institutions shall adopt the Fee fixed by the concerned State Fee Regulatory authority. Institutions
Deemed to be Universities shall comply the UGC norms for Fee in Professional Education.
NOTE: The Institutions shall not directly or indirectly, demand or charge or accept, Capitation Fee or
demand any donation, by way of consideration for admission to any seat in any Course.
Those Institutions applied for the NBA having Extension of Approval with full “Approved Intake” for
consecutive six years and granted a reduction in Intake in that current Academic Year shall request
AICTE, if all the deficiencies are complied with. Such requests shall be processed as per the norms of the
Approval Process Handbook and on fulfilment; the NBA shall be intimated suitably.
AICTE does not recognize the Programme(s)/ Course(s) in Technical Education offered through ODL/
Online mode except in Management/Computer Application and Travel & Tourism / Artificial Intelligence
& Data Science / Logistics Programmes with the explicit approval of AICTE.
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 76
--- Page 91 ---
7.44
7.45
7.46
7.47
7.48
7.49
The State Government/ UT/ Directorate of Technical Education/ Directorate of Medical Education shall
ensure that 10% of reservation for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) as per the reservation policy for
admission, operational from the Academic year 2019-20 without affecting the reservation percentages
of SC/ ST/ OBC/ General. However, this would not be applicable in the case of Minority Institutions
referred to the Clause (1) of Article 30 of Constitution of India.
1. Ten percent (10%) EWS seats shall be enhanced in all Govt., Govt. Aided institutions, State Public
University departments as per the directives issued from time to time by Government of India
without disturbing the existing reservation percentage (%) being followed in these institutions.
The intake in these institutions shall be 1.25 times of the existing intake of respective category in
these institutions.
2. Further, the implementation of 10% EWS reservation in the private unaided-Institutions may be
considered based on the relevant policies of the respective state governments.
NOTE: EWS vacant seats shall be considered for the Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s) with the
same reservation policy for admission.
(a) Supernumerary seats (25 Nos.) are granted by the Council, for the Institutions falling under the
Centrally Supported Scheme of “Upgrading existing Polytechnics to integrate Persons with Benchmark
Disability (PWBD) in the mainstream of Technical and Vocational Education.
(b) Concession for the wards of Kashmiri Migrants and Kashmiri Pandit / Kashmiri Hindu Families (Non-
Migrants) living in Kashmir valley for admission in Higher Educational Institutions (As per MoE directives:
F.No. 3-4/2017-NER, Dated: 15th October, 2019). This is in addition to PMSSS supernumerary seats. They
are not eligible for scholarship
Affidavit 2 specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be uploaded in the AICTE Web-Portal in
e-stamp paper with digital signature of the authorized signatories.
In case of any litigation pertaining to the penal action initiated by the Council for an Institution,
for the contravention of any of the relevant Regulations, such Institution shall have to apply as per
Clause 8.1(b) / 8.18 (as applicable) in AICTE Web-Portal, in the absence of any specific court order to
the contrary.
Clause 1.5.4 of the Approval Process Handbook does not permit Self-financing Institutions to use
‘Indian; ‘National’ etc. in the Name of the Institution. The Institutions which were already given approval
with those words shall be instructed to change/ drop the word from the Name of the Institution, as the
Stake holders may misinterpret them to be Government/ Government Aided Institutions.
If any Institution (other than Government/ Government Aided) continue to use ‘Indian; ‘National; etc. in
the Name of the Institution, the Council shall remove such words while issuing EoA.
Tuition Fee Waiver (TFW) Scheme
a) | Scheme shall be applicable to all approved Technical Institutions offering Diploma, Post Diploma,
Under Graduate Programme(s), Computer Applications - MCA, PGCM - MBA, PGDM Programme(s)
and Lateral Entry provisions of these Programme(s).
b) | The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council.
c) Requirements and Eligibility
Sons/ Daughters of parents whose annual income from all sources does not exceed
=. 8.00 Lakh.
+ The Waiver is limited to the Tuition Fee as approved by the State Level Fee Committee for
Self-Financing Institutions and by the Government for the Government/ Government aided
Institutions. All other Fees except Tuition Fee shall have to be paid by the beneficiary.
d) Admission Procedure
+ Under this Scheme, up to a maximum of 5% of “Approved Intake” per Course shall be available
for this admission. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature. These supernumerary
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 77
--- Page 92 ---
seats shall be available only to such Course(s) in an Institution, where a minimum of 50% of
“Approved Intake” are filled up in last Academic year.
The Competent Authority to effect this admission is the State Government/ UT or its designated
authority.
In the event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to any
other category of candidates.
The State Admission Authority shall invite applications under this category; make a separate
merit list for this category and effect admission on the basis of the merit list so generated.
The Institutions shall publish in their Brochure and Web site the details of this scheme.
Competent Authority for admission shall submit a separate list of the students admitted under
this category to the Institution to which they are admitted for compliance.
A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to change
the Institution/ Course under any circumstances.
The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their Web site
for information to the students and other stakeholders.
7.50 Supernumerary seats for the Union Territories J&K and Ladakh under Prime Minister's Special Scholarship
Scheme (PMSSS)
a)
Scheme shall be applicable to selected approved Technical Institutions having NIRF ranking and
offering Bachelor Programme(s). Diploma holders in Engineering are eligible for Lateral Entry
under the provisions of these Programme(s).
2 seats per Course shall be available for these admission with the maximum of 10 seats per
Institution. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature and shall be available to such Course(s)
in an Institution.
The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council subject to, the changes
suggested by the Inter-Ministerial Committee of MoE from time to time.
Requirements and Eligibility
All students domicile of J&K and Ladakh are eligible for seats under this scheme.
The student passed Higher Secondary Examination (12th Std.) from the schools located in J&K
and Ladakh.
Sons/ Daughters of parents whose annual income from all sources does not exceed = 8.00
Lakh.
Admission Procedure
AICTE shall invite applications under this category, make a separate merit list for this category
and effect admission based on the merit list as generated through Counselling or otherwise
as decided from time to time.
In the event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to any
other category of Applicants.
A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to change
the Institution/ Course under any circumstances without permission from AICTE.
7.51 Release of Security Deposit
7.51.1
Procedure
a) The Trust/ Society/ Company shall upload/ submit the following documents in AICTE Web-
Portal for the release of the FDR/ RTGS.
Application/ request letter of the Institution for FDR/ RTGS release
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 78
--- Page 93 ---
7.51.2
7.51.3
7.51.4
7.51.5
7.51.6
Affidavit 6 with details of the Institution and Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, FDR/ RTGS
details (as per the standard format)
+ Copy of FDR to be released, in a corpus fund made by RPGF, copy(s) of the Demand Draft (if
any) submitted to AICTE for creation of RPGF/ Online payment proof for Security Deposit
Zs
Approval Bureau after verification shall forward the same to the, Public Grievance Redressal
Cell (PGRC) and Vigilance Cell of AICTE to give their clearance for the release of the FDR.
c) Incase of FDR/ RPGF, upon clearance from all the above, NOC shall be issued to the Institution
by the Approval Bureau at AICTE.
d) Incase of RTGS, the sanction order shall be issued by the Council.
If an Institution has any financial embezzlement with Government Bodies/ Banks, then Security Deposit
shall not be released till the NOC from such body is received.
In case an Institution/Trust/ Society/ Company violates the Security Deposit related norms, the Council
shall initiate appropriate penal action.
For the Institutions approved by AICTE and later converted into a Private University/Institution Deemed
to be University by appropriate State/ Central Act, the release of Security Deposit shall be subject to no
pending Complaints or Disciplinary Proceedings against such Institutions in addition to the submission
of the above documents.
For the Institutions approved for Progressive Closure (Institutional/Program specific), Security Deposit
(as applicable) shall be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company, subject to the
submission of a Certificate from the affiliating University/Board stating that no students are studying
in the Institution. Such a Certificateis not needed, if the Security Deposit is already matured.
In case of grant of approval to the merger of Institutions, Security Deposit of the Child Institution(s)
shall be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company, subject to the submission of a
Certificate from the affiliating University/Board stating that no students are studying in the Institution.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 79
--- Page 94 ---
CHAPTER-VIII
Penal Action in case of Violation of the Norms and Regulations
8.1
8.2
8.3
Introduction
a. An Institution offering any Programme/ Course in Technical Education in violation of
Regulations/ Approval Process Handbook, shall be liable to appropriate Penal action including
fine/ no admission/ reduction in “Approved Intake”/ Withdrawal of Approval/ criminal action by
the Council against defaulting Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated Individuals/ the Institution,
as the case may be.
b. If any Technical Institution contravenes any of the provisions of relevant Regulations, the
Council after making appropriate inquiry through Standing Hearing Committee and after
providing an opportunity of being heard through the Standing Appellate Committee shall
withdraw the approval granted. In case of Withdrawal of Approval of the Institution, the
Technical Institution/Trust/ Society/ Company shall apply afresh for approval after completion
of two Academic Years for setting up a new Technical Institution with a different name as per
the procedure defined in the Approval Process Handbook
c Further that, the students admitted to the Institution whose approval has been withdrawn for
the current Academic Year shall be redistributed to other AICTE approved Institutions in the
jurisdiction of the affiliating University/ Board by the Competent Authority of the respective
State Government/ UT. AICTE approval given to the Course(s) in the previous Academic Year(s),
if any, to such Institution against which the admitted students shall be treated as AICTE
approved Course(s) only.
d. If any of the information mentioned in the Affidavit is proved as false, penal action shall be
initiated on the Deponent.
e. If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes without the approval of the Council,
it shall be declared as unapproved Institution and the Council shall inform respective State
Government/ UT to initiate appropriate penal, civil/ criminal action against such defaulting
Institutions/ Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated Individuals as the case maybe.
Non-Submission/ Submission of Incomplete/ False/Incorrect Information/Violation of Regulatory
Provisions in Online Application for Extension of Approval
Non-Submission/ submission of incomplete/ false information/incorrect information/violation of
regulatory provisions while applying for Extension of Approval shall invite appropriate penal action
against the Institution / University. The Institution /University shall be liable to any one or more of the
following punitive actions by the Council.
a Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
c No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution/University
NOTE: University / Institution shall be liable to withdrawal of Approval in case of running Programme(s)/
Course(s) with partial approval of AICTE. University shall be liable to withdrawal of approval in case
of violation of regulatory provisions (e.g. Running Integrated/Dual programme/course which requires
approval from different regulatory bodies.)
Non-Fulfilment of Requirement of Qualified Principal/ Director
An Institution, not having qualified Principal/ Director for a period more than 12 months shall be liable
to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council till the regular Principal/ Director is
appointed. For the non-Fulfilment of requirement of qualified Principal/ Director, the actions initiated
by the Trust/ Society/ Company/ affiliating Body/ State Government/ UT, process of recruitment not
followed, temporary arrangements made and satisfactory reasons for non-appointment, if any, have to
be ascertained.
Accordingly, the Institution shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by
the Council:
AICTE &- ‘i APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 80
--- Page 95 ---
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
a. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
b. No admission for one Academic Year
c Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
Non-Fulfilment of Faculty: Student ratio, not adhering to the Pay Scales and/or qualifications
prescribed for Faculty
8.4.1 As per All India Council for Technical Education notification (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/
Staff Member) Regulations, 2021 vide F.No. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated
25.03.2021, all Pay Scales related Issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the
concerned University or State DTE.
8.4.2 Incase of standalone PGDM /PGCM Institutions, AICTE shall Initiate Action through Committee
constituted by AICTE.
8.4.3. State Fee Regulatory Authorities should decide the Fee commensurate with the State
Government Employees and other Institutes under the purview of the concerned State and
the States should follow the same.
8.4.4 Institutions/Universities/Deemed-to-be-Universities if recommended under Clauses above
found not adhering to Pay scales or qualifications prescribed for Faculty members for more
than 12 months and not maintaining prescribed Faculty: Student ratio shall be liable to any
one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:
a Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. — Reduction in “Approved Intake”
No admission in respective Course(s) for one Academic Year
Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
ean
Withdrawal of approval in the respective Course(s)
f. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
NOTE: Undertaking should be from Chairman/Secretary of Trust / Society /Company in all
Faculty Related Grievances.
Non-Fulfilment of Computer, Software, Internet, Printers, Laboratory Equipment, Books,
Journals, Library facilities requirements, etc.
Institutions not maintaining prescribed requirements of Computer, Software, Internet, Printers,
Laboratory Equipment, Books, Journals, Library facilities, etc. shall be liable to any one or more of the
following punitive actions by the Council.
a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
c. Noadmission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
Non-Fulfilment of Essential Requirements
Institutions not maintaining essential requirements as per Appendix 6 of the Approval Process
Handbook shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council.
a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
c. Noadmission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
d. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
Non-Fulfilment of Location/ Built-up Area/ as specified in the Approval Process Handbook at the time
of year of establishment or the current Academic Year
Institutions working in a temporary location or at location not approved by the Council and Institutions
not fulfilling prescribed Built-up area requirements shall be liable to any one or more of the following
punitive actions by the Council.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 81
--- Page 96 ---
8.8
8.9
8.10
Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
a 2
Reduction in “Approved Intake”
c. Noadmission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
Excess Admission
Excess admission over the “Approved Intake” shall not be allowed under any circumstances. In case any
excess admission is reported to/ noted by the Council, appropriate penal action shall be initiated against
the Institution. The Institution shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the
Council.
a. Five times the total Fee collected per student shall be levied against each excess admission as fine.
b. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
Reduction in “Approved Intake”
No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
e@m> pan
Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
Charging Excess Fee than the Fee Prescribed by the Concerned State/ Fee Regulatory Committee
The Institutions shall have to announce all Fees such as Tuition Fee, Examination Fee, etc. on their
Web Site transparently and adhere to the same strictly. No Technical Institution shall collect any other
Fee (Payment/ Amount) from the students, in addition to the Fee fixed by the State/ Fee Regulatory
Committee. If any Institution does not follow the said guidelines, the Institution shall be liable to
punitive actions from any one or more of the following by the Council:
Twice the total Fee collected per student and the excess Fee collected shall be refunded to the student.
a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
No admission status in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
pan
Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
f. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
Institutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical/online verification of Infrastructural
facilities/ Institutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building
License/ Form D/ Barrier free environment/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities not having
NAD/ Institutions demanding for the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at
the time of joining the Institution
In the event, a Faculty member intends to leave the Institution in the middle of the Semester without
sufficient notice to the Institution to make a suitable alternate arrangement, he/ she may complete
the syllabus of the Course(s) allotted to him/ her keeping in view of the academic interests of students.
In any case, the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members shall not be retained by the
Institution.
Institutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical verification of Infrastructural facilities/
Institutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D/ Barrier
free environment/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities not having NAD/ Institutions demanding for
the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at the time of joining the Institution shall be
liable for any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:
a. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
b. No admission for one Academic Year
c. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution
AICTE & cen APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 82
--- Page 97 ---
8.11
8.12
Violation of norms of admission by the Institutions/ Universities conducting PGDM/ PGCM
Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having NAD or Institutions offering PGDM Course(s) in Regular
or ODL mode not uploading student enrollment data and list of students completed the Course(s)
successfully along with their CGPA/ Percentage of marks in the AICTE Web-Portal.
Norms for conducting PGDM/ PGCM Courses shall be as per Appendix 9 of the Approval Process
Handbook. If any Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University fails to comply with any of the
conditions specified therein/any violation in the admission procedure specified in the Approval Process
Handbook for the PGDM/ PGCM Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having NAD or Institutions offering
PGDM Course(s) not uploading student enrollment data in the AICTE Web-Portal, the Council after
giving reasonable opportunity of being heard through Standing Appellate Committee shall be liable
for any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:
a. No admission for Academic Year
b. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution.
c. Withdrawal of graded autonomy granted by the Council.
Violation of Norms in Case of Collaboration and Twinning Programme
a. If a University/ Institution fails to comply with any of the conditions as contained in the Approval
Process Handbook, even after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard through Standing
Appellate Committee, the Council shall withdraw the approval of the Twinning Programme
granted to such University/ Institution to offer their Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under
Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree in India and forbid such Foreign
University/ Institution to either open Centers or enter into any Collaborative arrangement with any
University/ Institution in India.
b. The Council shall also inform the concerned agencies including Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry
of Home Affairs, RBI of such decisions and advise these agencies to take any or all of the following
measures
Refusal/ withdrawal for grant of visa to employees/ teachers of the said Foreign University/
Institution.
Stop transfer of funds from India to parent Country.
Informing the Public about the withdrawal of approval of the Twinning Programme with
Foreign University/ Institution and the consequence there of.
c. Incase, it comes to the notice of the Council, that a Foreign University is offering Diploma/ Post
Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree
Level Programme in Technical Education in India directly or in Collaboration with an Indian Partner
without obtaining approval, the Council shall initiate immediate action under the Indian Penal
Code for Criminal breach of Trust, misconduct, fraud, cheating, etc.
d. Once the approval of the Twinning Programme is withdrawn, the Council shall make an attempt
in co-ordination with concerned State Government/ UT to re-allocate the students enrolled
in such Programme to other approved Institutions of the Council. The Institution shall have to
return the entire Fee collected from such students to the Institutions in which the students are
accommodated.
e. Such Foreign University/ Institution shall not be allowed to collaborate with any other Centre/
Institution or enter into a Collaborative arrangement in India for at least next 3 years.
f. UGC amendments from time to time on the subject shall be applicable.
Fee Refund Cases
8.13.1 In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected
from the student, after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) shall be refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions
to retain the School/ Institution Leaving Certificates in original.
8.13.2 Incase, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the vacated seat is consequently filled
by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must refund the Fee collected
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than 71000/- (Rupees One Thousand only)
and proportionate deductions of monthly Fee and hostel rent, where applicable.
8.13.3. The last date for withdrawal of PGDM admission for the purpose of refund of fee shall be as per
the last date mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 83
--- Page 98 ---
8.16
8.17
8.13.4 In case the vacated seat is not filled, the Institution should refund the Security Deposit and
return the original documents.
8.13.5 The Institution should not demand Fee for the subsequent years from the students cancelling
their admission at any point of time. Fee refund along with the return of Certificates should be
completed within 7 days.
8.13.6 Institutions not following guidelines issued by the Council regarding refund of Fee for
cancellation of admission or delaying refunds shall be liable to any one or more of the following
punitive actions by the Council.
a. Fine for Non-Compliance of refund rules of the Fee levied against each case shall be five
times the total Fee collected per student
b. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
c. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
d. Noadmission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
e. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)
NOTE: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the academic related activities as notified by the
Council from time to time are binding on all the AICTE Approved Universities/Institutions.
Security Deposit
In case of Institutions where FDRs are encashed before the date of maturity or not depositing the
required Security Deposit at the time of LoA, a penalty of 10% of the value of the FDR shall be imposed.
However, Institutions that had not created FDR/created FDR for lesser duration/ lesser amount than
prescribed at the time of LoA have to create the same accordingly as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
Complaints regarding the use of fake certificates of SC/ST/OBC to be investigated in time bound
manner and if found guilty, such admission should be cancelled. Further, appropriate action
shall be initiated accordingly with due intimation to AICTE.
Penalty amount shall be paid online to the Council as per the instructions.
Complaint Cases
a. All Institutions shall have Grievance Redressal mechanism as notified by the Council.
b. In case of receipt of any Complaint(s) about an Institution, the same shall be processed by Public
Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) of AICTE.
c. The verified Complaint shall be placed before a Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)
for further necessary action. If necessary, the complainant as well as the Institute may be called
to appear before SCSC at his/ her own cost. Based on the recommendation of SCSC, a Warning or
Show Cause Notice may be issued to the Institution or Expert Visit Committee may be conducted
through Approval Bureau.
d. The report of the Expert Visit Committee/ Show Cause notice, if issued shall be placed before the
Standing Hearing Committee.
e. Two representatives of the Institution (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Photo
ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents before
the Standing Hearing Committee. If necessary, the complainant may be called to appear before
Standing Hearing Committee at his/ her own cost.
f. The recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for approval.
g. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal by a detailed
Speaking Order. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the
Institution shall have the right to appeal as per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook.
h. As per CVC guidelines, Anonymous/ Pseudonymous Complaints shall not be processed.
i. Each Institution shall upload the number of Complaints and Grievances received and action taken
in their Web site and update AICTE through the monthly online status report.
AICTE &- 3 APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 84
--- Page 99 ---
8.18 Procedure for Restoration against Punitive Action
a.
The Applicant shall make an application for restoration on AICTE Web-Portal along with the
application for Extension of Approval of the next Academic Year.
The restoration is subject to Expert Visit Committee verifying all the requirements as specified in
the Approval Process Handbook.
The Expert Visit Committee Report shall be placed before the Standing Hearing Committee.
Recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for necessary Approval.
If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall have
the right to appeal as per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook. The Council shall give an
opportunity for presenting its case before Standing Appellate Committee. The recommendations
of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be considered by the Council.
In case of restoration, Extension of Approval with restored Intake shall be uploaded on AICTE
Web-Portal, or otherwise Speaking Order shall also be uploaded on the Web-Portal.
Under extraordinary circumstances, if restoration/ Punitive action (except fine) is approved by
the Council beyond 30th April of the Calendar Year in compliance to the order dated 13.12.2012
passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in CA No.9048/ 2012 and the same shall be
implemented for the next Academic Year only.
In an extraordinary circumstance, to implement the withdrawal of approval in the current Academic
Year, students admitted shall be shifted to the nearby AICTE approved Institutions in consultation with
the concerned University/ Board/ State Government/ UT.
NOTE: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the approval (including academic) related activities as
notified by the Council from time to time is binding on all the AICTE Approved Institutions / Universities.
AICTE & “2% & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24 85
--- Page 100 ---
AICTE & cen APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 101 ---
AICTE & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 102 ---
AICTE & cen APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 103 ---
AICTE & APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2023-24
--- Page 104 ---
TL POR TRCHENICAL x
BUC ATVIN
\
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Nelson Mandela Marg, New Delhi-110070
@ @officialaictE (© @AICTE_INDIA © /MediaAicTE (f) /company/aicteindia () @Aicte.official
@ www.aicte-india.org