--- Page 1 ---
ay ogee
— faraftencta styert ara
apie University Grants Commission
(Sen sarea, AA ATA)
Prof. Manish R. Joshi (Ministry of Education, Govt. of India)
Secretary
No. F. 6-1/2025 (Regulations Feedback) 16 we 1946 /6" January, 2025
andar yaa
UGC has revised the UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of
Teachers and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the
Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education. 2018 and developed a draft UGC
(Minimum Qualifications for Appointment and Promotion of Teachers and Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and measures for the Maintenance of Standards in
Higher Education) Regulations 2025 and Guidelines on Cadre Ratio. Period of
Probation & Confirmation, Leaves, Teaching Days, Academic Research and
Administrative Commitments, Seniority and Code of Professional Ethics for Teachers
and Other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges. The draft regulations and
guidelines were launched by Hon‘ble Minister of Education, Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
Ji, on 6" January, 2025.
The Draft Regulations and guidelines are uploaded on the UGC website for public
consultation.
I request you kindly to share your valuable feedback on the Draft Regulations on or
before 5p February, 2025 in the following email address:
draft-regulations@ugc.gov.in
Ee
argyle ae art, AE feecit-110002 | Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002
gear (Ph.): 011-23236288/23239337 | aera aa (Se) (E-mail) : secy.ugc¢@nic.in
--- Page 2 ---
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the ............... 2025
Draft UGC (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment and Promotion
of Teachers and Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and
Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education)
Regulations, 2025
No. F.1-2/2017(EC/PS).—In exercise of the powers conferred
under clause (e) and (g) of sub-section(l) of Section 26 read with Section
14 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956), and in
supersession of the “UGC regulations on Minimum Qualifications for
Appointment of Teachers and other Academic Staff in Universities and
Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher
Education 2018” (Regulation No.F.1-2/2017(EC/PS) dated 18" July
2018) together with all amendments made therein from time to time, the
University Grants Commission, hereby, frames the following regulations,
namely:-
1.0 Short title, application and commencement:
1.1. These regulations may be called the UGC (Minimum Qualifications
for Appointment and Promotion of Teachers and Academic Staff in
Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of
Standards in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations, 2025.
1.2 These shall apply to every University established or incorporated by
or under a Central Act, Provincial Act, or State Act, every Institution
including a Constituent or an affiliated College recognized by the
Commission, in consultation with the University concerned under
Clause (f) of Section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act,
1956 and every Institution deemed to be a University under Section
3 of the said Act.
1.3 These shall come into force from the date of notification. However,
the date of implementation of the revision of pay shall be 1st January
2016.
14 These regulations specify the minimum qualifications, experience,
and accomplishments for appointment and promotion of Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor, Professor, Assistant Librarian,
Deputy Librarian, Additional Librarian, Librarian, Assistant Director
of Physical Education & Sports, Deputy Director of Physical
Education & Sports, Additional Director of Physical Education &
Sports and Director of Physical Education & Sports; and
appointment of Principal and Vice-Chancellor in higher education
institutions (HEIs).
1.5 For the purposes of direct recruitment and promotion in teaching
posts in disciplines relating to affiliated colleges and university
education, inter alia in the fields of health, medicine, special
1
--- Page 3 ---
2.0
education, agriculture, veterinary and allied fields, teacher education,
physiotherapy, occupational therapy, standards laid down by
authorities established by the relevant Act of Parliament under article
246 of the Constitution for the purpose of co-ordination and
determination of standards in institutions for higher education or
research and scientific and technical institutions, shall prevail. For
disciplines relating to Engineering/Technology and management
education in universities, these regulations shall apply.
Provided that where any regulatory authority has laid down no such
norms and standards in disciplines offered by affiliated colleges,
UGC regulations herein shall be applicable till the concerned
regulatory authority prescribes any norms or standards.
All HEls shall, as soon as possible, but not later than six months of
the coming into force of these regulations, take effective steps to
amend their statutes, ordinances, or other statutory provisions
governing it to bring the same in accordance with these regulations.
The overall selection procedure for direct recruitment and promotion
under CAS shall incorporate a transparent and_ objective
methodology of analysis of the merits and the credential of the
application to make the system more credible; universities/colleges
may assess the ability for teaching and/or research aptitude through
a seminar or a lecture.
Definitions. —In these regulations, unless the context otherwise
requires, -
vi.
vii.
“Act” means the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956);
“Career Advancement Scheme” (CAS) means a scheme for granting
personal promotion to individuals from one academic level to a higher
academic level holding a substantive sanctioned post in a higher
education institution;
“College” means any institution, whether known as such or by any
other name, which provides for a course of study for obtaining any
qualification from a university and which, in accordance with the rules
and regulations of such university, is recognized as competent to
provide for such course of study and present students undergoing
such course of study for the examination for the award of such
qualification;
“Commission” means the University Grants Commission established
under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956);
“Constituent college” means a college operating under the
administrative, academic, and financial control of a university;
“Credit” means the number of hours of instruction required per week
over a semester as defined in the National Credit Framework (NCrF)
“Degree” means a degree specified under sub-section (3) of section
22 of the Act;
--- Page 4 ---
viii.
xi.
xii.
xiii.
xiv.
XV.
xvi.
xvii.
xviii.
xix.
XX.
xxi.
xxii.
xxiii.
“External Subject Expert” means a renowned expert not below the
academic level 14 in the subject who is not an employee or retiree
from the Higher [Educational Institution where the
recruitment/promotion takes place;
“Grade” means a numerical weight allotted to each letter grade on a
10-point scale;
“Higher Education Institution” (HEI) means a university established
or incorporated by or under a Central Act, Provincial Act, or State Act
as referred to under clause (f) of section 2 of the Act, institution or
college recognized by or affiliated to such university and an institution
deemed to be a university under section 3 of the Act which is offering
programmes through conventional mode or online or open and
distance learning mode, in the area of higher education or research
therein;
"Indian languages” means languages included in the 8" schedule of
the Indian Constitution.
“NET” means National Eligibility Test (NET) conducted to determine
the eligibility for the post of Assistant Professor in Indian HEls;
“Ordinance” means a law or rule made by an authority;
“Orientation Course” means a course to create awareness among
young faculty members about the profession and their institution;
“Peer review” means evaluation of scientific, academic, or
professional work by experts in the same field;
“Programme” means a higher education programme pursued for a
degree specified by the Commission under sub-section (3) of section
22 of the Act;
“Promotion” means the movement of an employee from a lower
academic level to a higher academic level;
“Qualification” means a certificate, diploma, or degree awarded by a
recognized HEI on successful completion of a particular higher
education programme after due assessment and evaluation;
“Quorum” means the minimum number of members of a body that is
required to be present at a given meeting;
Relevant / Allied subject means a subject that may be related to the
main subject under consideration, either as a single discipline or,
multidiscipline, or inter-discipline;
“Recruitment” means an overall process of identifying, screening,
shortlisting, and interacting with candidates for positions in a HEI;
“Refresher Course” means a course that reviews and updates a topic
to keep the faculty members abreast of developments in the subject;
“SET or SLET” means State Eligibility Test (SET) or State Level
Eligibility Test (SLET) conducted at the State level to determine the
eligibility for the post of Assistant Professor in HEls of that particular
State;
--- Page 5 ---
xxiv. “Selection Committee” means a committee entrusted with the
responsibility of selecting candidates for a specific position or role in
the HEls;
xxv. “Supervisor” means a teacher/researcher recognized by HEls to
supervise the Ph.D. scholar for his/her research;
xxvi. "Teacher" means professors, associate professors, assistant
professors, and such other academic staff as may be appointed for
imparting instructions or conducting research including the adjunct
faculty or professor of practice or visiting faculty;
xxvii. The words and expressions used in these regulations and not defined
but defined in the Act shall have the same meanings respectively
assigned to them;
3.0 General Conditions: Recruitment and Promotion
3.1 The direct recruitment to the posts of Assistant Professor, Associate
Professor and Professor in the HEls shall be based on merit through
an all-India advertisement, followed by selection by a duly constituted
Selection Committee as per the provisions made under these
regulations.
3.2 If the discipline/subject chosen in the 4-year undergraduate
programme (NCrF level 6) or postgraduate programme (NCrF level
6.5/7) is different from the chosen discipline/subject in Ph.D, the
discipline/subject in which a candidate obtained Ph.D. shall be
considered eligible for appointment as Assistant Professor,
Associate Professor or Professor in that discipline/subject.
3.3 If the discipline/subject chosen in the 4-year undergraduate
programme (NCrF level 6) or postgraduate programme (NCrF level
6.5/7) is different from the chosen discipline/subject in NET/SET, the
discipline/subject in which a candidate qualified NET/SET shall be
considered eligible for appointment as Assistant Professor in that
discipline/subject.
3.4 A relaxation of 5% marks shall be allowed at the undergraduate
(NCrF level 5.5/6) or at the postgraduate (NCrF level 6.5/7) level for
the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other
Backward Classes (OBC)(Non-creamy Layer)/EWS/Persons with
Disabilities category.
3.5One or more qualifications (Class 12/equivalent, UG, PG & Ph.D.) in
Indian language medium may be encouraged.
3.6 Publication of book chapters and books in Indian languages may be
encouraged.
3.7 A relaxation of 5% marks shall be provided to the Ph.D. Degree
holders who have obtained their postgraduate Degree before 19%
September 1991.
3.8Notable contributions to be considered by the selection committee for
recruitment and promotion of university & college teachers are: (1)
4
--- Page 6 ---
Innovative Teaching Contribution; (2) Research or Teaching Lab
Development; (3) Consultancy / Sponsored Research funding as a
Principal Investigator or Co-Principal Investigator; (4) Teaching
contributions in Indian languages; (5) Teaching-Learning and
Research in Indian Knowledge System; (6) Student Internship / Project
Supervision; (7) Digital Content Creation for MOOCs; (8) Community
Engagement and Service; (9) Startup, as per the intellectual property
policies of the HEI, registered with the Registrar of Companies (ROC)
as a founding promoter, successfully raising funding through
government, angel or venture funds to support the startup.
3.9Notable contributions to be considered by the selection committee for
recruitment and promotion of academic staff (Librarian cadre) are: (1)
Innovative Information Service Designed and/or Implemented; (2) User
Interaction Activities Designed or involved in; (3) Leveraging Web-
based Resources for Library users; (4) Managing users and
Resources in a Consortium; (5) Digital Content Creation for MOOCs;
(6) Digital Library Management; (7) Services for persons with
disabilities; (8) Implementationand Management of Multilingual
Collections (Physical and Electronic) and Services; (9) Innovative and
Sustainable Green Library Spaces and Activities.
3.10 Notable contributions to be considered by the selection committee
for recruitment and promotion of academic staff (Director, Physical
Education and Sports cadre) are: (1) Contribution to the inclusion of
persons with disabilities in sports / physical activities; (2) Building
partnerships with local schools, Sports Club and Community
Organizations to promote sports and Physical Activity; (3) Developing
Specialized Training Programmes to help Student-Athletes reach their
full potential; (4) Organizing Health and Fitness Workshop, Seminars
and Wellness Campaigns; (5) Mentoring Students interested in
Pursuing Career in Sports, Fitness and related Fields; (6) Developing
Strategies to Enhance Performance of teams/athletes for inter-
college/inter-university/State/National level competitions; (7)
Promotion of Indigenous Indian Games; (8) Digital Content Creation for
MOOGCs; (9) Organizing competitions and conducting coaching camps
for students in a university or college of at least two weeks duration.
3.11. The research publications should be in peer-reviewed journals, and
the book chapter or book must be published by a recognized academic
or professional publisher with a reputation for rigorous peer review and
quality editing. Self-published book chapters or books will not be
considered. The selection committee shall decide whether the
research publications are in a peer-reviewed journal, whether the
publication of a book/book chapter is by a reputed publisher, and
whether the contributions are notable, based on the recommendations
of the three external subject experts of the selection committee
constituted in accordance with these regulations.
3.12 The Ph.D. Degree shall be a mandatory qualification for promotion
to Assistant Professor (Academic Level 12), Associate Professor
(Academic Level 13A) and Professor (Academic Level 14) in
5
--- Page 7 ---
universities and colleges.
3.13 The time candidates take to acquire M.Phil. and/or Ph.D. Degree
shall not be considered as teaching/ research experience to be
claimed for appointment to the teaching positions. Further, the period
of active service spent on pursuing a research degree simultaneously
with teaching assignments without taking any kind of leave shall be
counted as experience for direct recruitment/ promotion. Regular
faculty members up to twenty per cent of the total faculty strength
(excluding faculty on medical / maternity leave) shall be allowed by
their respective institutions to take study leave to pursue Ph.D.
degrees
3.14 No person shall be appointed to the post of University and College
teacher, Librarian, or Director of Physical Education and Sports in any
university or in any of the colleges or in an institution deemed to be a
University under Section 3 of the said Act if such person does not fulfill
the requirements as to the qualifications for the appropriate post as
provided in these regulations.
3.15 A teacher representing SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women / Persons with
disabilities is to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor (a) if any of the
candidates belonging to any of these categories is the applicant and
(b) if any of the members of the selection committee does not belong
to these categories. The teacher, so nominated for this purpose in the
selection committee, shall be one level above the cadre level of the
applicant, and such nominee shall ensure that the norms of the Central
Government or State Government, in relation to the categories
mentioned above, are strictly followed during the selection process.
3.16 The candidates registered for the Ph.D. degree prior to July 11,
2009, shall be governed by the provisions of the then existing
Ordinances / By-laws / regulations of the Institution awarding the
degree, and such Ph.D. Candidates shall be exempted from the
NET/SLET/SET requirement for recruitment and appointment of
Assistant Professor, Assistant Librarian, Assistant Director of Physical
Education and Sports in a University / College.
3.17 For colleges coming under the purview of State Governments/Union
Territories, direct recruitment to the post of Assistant Professor,
Associate Professor, and Professor shall be either as per these
regulations or as per the rules of the State Government by following
the minimum qualifications as given in these regulations.
4.0 Direct Recruitment
4.1 Minimum Qualifications, Experience, and Accomplishments (For
the Disciplines of Arts, Commerce, Humanities, Education,
Law, Social Sciences, Sciences, Languages, Library Science,
Physical Education, Journalism & Mass Communication,
Engineering/Technology, Management, Drama, Yoga, Music,
Performing Arts, Visual Arts, and Other Traditional Indian Art
Forms like Sculpture etc. in Universities and Colleges)
--- Page 8 ---
4.1. |. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 10):
i) AUG degree (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks or a PG
Degree (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks (or an
equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree (NCrF Level 8).
or
A PG degree (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks (or an
equivalent grade and qualification in the National Eligibility Test
(NET) conducted by the UGC, CSIR, ICAR etc. or a similar test
like SLET/SET
or
A PG degree (NCrF Level 7; e.g. M.E., M. Tech.,) with at least
55% marks (or an equivalent grade).
Either the above qualifications or the following qualifications can be
used for the disciplines of Yoga, Music, Performing Arts, Visual
Arts, and Other Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture, Drama
etc.
At least a UG degree (NCrF Level 5.5/6) with five years of
professional experience and fulfilling the following criteria:
i) Commendable professional achievement at the State or National
level through authenticated proof; and
it) Adequate knowledge of theory and ability to teach with logical
reasoning and illustrations in the discipline.
Note: Fulfillment of the above two criteria shall be determined by the
selection committee based on the recommendation of the three
external subject experts of the selection committee constituted in
accordance with these regulations.
4.1. Il. Associate Professor: (Academic Level 13A):
For the Disciplines of Arts, Commerce, Humanities,
Education, Law, Social Sciences, Sciences, Languages,
Library Science, Physical Education, Journalism & Mass
Communication, Engineering/Technology, Management,
Drama, Yoga, Music, Performing Arts, Visual Arts, and Other
Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture etc.
i) A UG degree (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks or a PG
Degree (NCrF Level 6.5/7) with at least_55% marks (or an
equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree (NCrF Level 8).
ii) A minimum of eight years teaching and/or research experience in
a University / College or a minimum of eight years experience in
teaching and/or research in a position equivalent to that of an
Assistant Professor/Associate Professor in a research institution
or any other Indian or foreign institutions of comparable
standards. The research experience shall be counted as per the
clause 3.13.
iii) A minimum of eight research publications in peer-reviewed
journals or publication of eight book chapters or publication of a
7
--- Page 9 ---
book as an author or two books as a co-author by a reputed
publisher or eight granted patents. A combination of research
publications, book chapters and granted patents totalling eight
can be considered.
iv) Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.8.
Either the above qualifications or the following qualifications can be
used for the disciplines of Yoga, Music, Performing Arts, Visual Arts,
and Other Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture, Drama, etc.
At least a UG degree (NCrF Level 5.5/6), with ten years of
professional experience and fulfilling the following criteria:
i) Commendable professional achievement at the State or
National level through authenticated proof; and
ii) Adequate knowledge of theory and ability to teach with logical
reasoning and illustrations in the discipline.
Note: Fulfillment of the above two criteria shall be determined by the
selection committee based on the recommendations of the three
external subject experts of the selection committee constituted in
accordance with these regulations.
4.1. Ill. Professor: (Academic Level 14):
Forthe Disciplines of Arts, Commerce, Humanities, Education,
Law, Social Sciences, Sciences, Languages, Library Science,
Physical Education, Journalism & Mass Communication,
Engineering/Technology, Management, Drama, Yoga, Music,
Performing Arts, Visual Arts, and Other Traditional Indian Art
Forms like Sculpture etc.
i) A UG degree (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks or a PG
Degree (NCrF Level 6.5/7) with at least_55% marks (or an
equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree (NCrF Level 8).
ii) A minimum of ten years of teaching and/or research experience
at the level of Assistant Professor/Associate Professor in a
University / College / Indian or Foreign Research Institutions of
comparable standards, of which at least three years should be at
the level of an Associate Professor or equivalent. The research
experience shall be counted as per the clause 3.13.
iii) A minimum of ten research publications in peer-reviewed journals
or publication of ten book chapters or publication of four books as
an author or eight books as a co-author by a reputed publisher or
ten granted patents. A combination of research publications,
books, book chapters and granted patents totalling ten, can be
considered.
iv) As a sole supervisor, one doctoral candidate was awarded a
Ph.D. degree, or as a co-supervisor, two doctoral candidates
--- Page 10 ---
were awarded Ph.D. degrees.
v) Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.8.
Either the above qualifications or the following qualifications can be
used for the disciplines of Yoga, Music, Performing Arts, Visual
Arts, and Other Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture, Drama
etc.
At least a UG degree (NCrF Level 5.5/6) holder with fifteen years
of professional experience and fulfilling the following criteria:
i) Commendable professional achievement at the National or
International level through authenticated proof; and
ii) Adequate knowledge of theory and ability to teach with logical
reasoning and illustrations in the discipline.
Note: Fulfillment of the above two criteria shall be determined by the
selection committee based on the recommendations of the three
external subject experts of the selection committee constituted in
accordance with these regulations.
4.1. IV. Assistant Librarian (Academic Level 10) in Universities and
Colleges
i) A UG degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks ora
PG Degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks (or
an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in Library Science,
Information Science, or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 8).
Or
A PG degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks (or
an equivalent grade) and qualification in the National Eligibility Test
(NET) conducted by the UGC or a similar test like SLET/SET in
Library Science, Information Science or a relevant/allied discipline.
4.1. V. Deputy Librarian (Academic Level 13 A) in universities
i. A UG degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks or
a PG Degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks
(or an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in Library Science,
Information Science, or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 8).
ii. A minimum of eight years experience as an Assistant Librarian in a
University / College.
iii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given at
--- Page 11 ---
3.9
4.1. VI. Librarian (Academic Level 14) in universities
i. A UG degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks or
a PG Degree in Library Science, Information Science, or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55% marks
(or an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in Library Science,
Information Science, or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 8).
ii. A minimum of ten years of experience at the level of Assistant
Librarian/Deputy Librarian/Additional Librarian in a University /
College / Indian or Foreign Research Institution of comparable
standards, of which at least three years should be at the level of a
Deputy Librarian/Additional Librarian.
iii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given at
3.9.
4.1. VII. Assistant Director in Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 10) in Universities and Colleges
Eligibility (A or B) :
A.
i. A UG degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science
or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75% marks
or a PG Degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science
or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55%
marks (or an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in Physical
Education and Sports or Sports Science or a relevant/allied
discipline (NCrF Level 8).
or
A PG degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science
or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at least 55%
marks (or an equivalent grade) and qualification in the National
Eligibility Test (NET) conducted by the UGC or a similar test like
SLET/SET in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science or a
relevant/allied discipline.
ii. Passed the physical fitness test conducted in accordance with these
regulations.
Or
B. A medal winner in the Asian Games / Commonwealth Games / Asia
Cup / Asian Para Games / Para Sports at the Commonwealth
Games who has an undergraduate degree (NCrF level 5.5/6) in any
10
--- Page 12 ---
discipline. In the case of Bharatiya sports, the medal winner in that
sport at the national level shall be considered equivalent.
4.1. VIll. Deputy Director in Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 13 A) in Universities
Eligibility (A or B) :
A.
i. AUG degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science
or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75%
marks or PG Degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports
Science or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at
least 55% marks (or an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in
Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 8).
ii. A minimum of eight years experience as an Assistant Director of
Physical Education and Sports in a HEI.
iii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.10.
iv. Passed the physical fitness test in accordance with these
regulations.
Or
B. A participant in the Olympic Games / World Cup/ World
Championship / Paralympics who has at least a UG degree
(NCrF Level 5.5/6) in any discipline.
4.1. IX. Director of Physical Education and Sports (Academic Level
14) in universities
Eligibility (A or B) :
A.
i. AUG degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science
or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6) with at least 75%
marks or PG Degree in Physical Education and Sports or Sports
Science or a relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 6.5) with at
least 55% marks (or an equivalent grade) and a Ph.D. Degree in
Physical Education and Sports or Sports Science or a
relevant/allied discipline (NCrF Level 8).
ii. A minimum of ten years experience at the level of Assistant
Director/ Deputy Director/Additional Director of Physical
Education and Sports in a University / College/Indian or Foreign
Research Institution of comparable standards, of which at least
three years should be at the level of a Deputy Director/Additional
Director.
--- Page 13 ---
iii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.10
iv. Passed the physical fitness test in accordance with these
regulations.
or
B. A medal winner in the Olympic Games / World Cup / World
Championship / Paralympics with at least a UG degree (NCrF Level
5.5/6) in any discipline.
4.1. X. Physical Fitness Test Norms for the Selection of Assistant
Director/ Deputy Director/Director of Physical Education and
Sports
(a) Subject to the provisions of these regulations, all candidates who
are required to undertake the physical fitness test are required to
produce a medical certificate certifying that he/she is medically fit
before undertaking such tests.
(b) Persons with disabilities are exempted from physical fitness tests.
(c) On the production of such certificate mentioned in sub-clause (a)
above, the candidate would be required to undertake the physical
fitness test in accordance with the following norms:
NORMS FOR MEN
12 MINUTES RUN-WALK TEST
Up to 30 Up to 40 Up to 45 Above 45 Years
Years Years Years
1800 meters 1500 1200 meters 800 meters
meters
NORMS FOR WOMEN
8 MINUTES RUN-WALK TEST
Up to 30 Up to 40 Up to 45
Years Years Years
1000 meters
Above 45 Years
800 meters} 600 meters 400 Meters
4.2. Composition of Selection Committees (Forthe Disciplines of
Arts, Commerce, Humanities, Education, Law, Social Sciences,
Sciences, Languages, Library Science, Physical Education,
Journalism & Mass Communication, Engineering/Technology,
Management, Drama, Yoga, Music, Performing Arts, Visual Arts,
12
--- Page 14 ---
and Other Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture etc. in
Universities and Colleges)
4.2. |. Selection Committee Composition for Assistant Professor,
Assistant Librarian, Assistant Director of Physical Education
and Sports (Academic Level 10), Associate Professor, Deputy
Librarian, Deputy Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 13 A) and Professor, Librarian and Director of
Physical Education and Sports (Academic Level 14) in the
Universities shall be the following:
i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Selection
Committee.
ii) A teacher (not a member of either the academic or the
administrative bodies of the University or its affiliated colleges) not
below the rank of Professor to be nominated by the
Visitor/Chancellor/ Equivalent Authority, wherever applicable.
iii) Three external subject experts nominated by the Vice-Chancellor,
out of the panel of names approved by the relevant statutory bodies
of the university.
iv) Dean of the Faculty, wherever applicable.
v) Head/Chairperson of the Department/School.
Note: (1) Five members, including at least two external subject experts,
shall constitute the quorum, (2) A teacher representing
SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women / Persons with disabilities is to be
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor (a) if any of the candidates
belonging to any of these categories is the applicant and (b) if any
of the members of the selection committee does not belong to
these categories. (3) The recommendations of the Selection
Committee shall be placed before the Syndicate/ Executive
Council /Board of Management / Governing Body or equivalent
statutory body of the HEls for appropriate decision.
4.2. Il. Selection Committee Composition for Assistant Professor,
Assistant Librarian, Assistant Director of Physical Education
and Sports (Academic Level 10), Associate Professor
(Academic Level 13 A) and Professor (Academic Level 14) in
the colleges shall be the following:
i) The Chairperson of the Governing Body or equivalent statutory
body of the college shall be the Chairperson.
ii) The Principal of the College.
iii) Head of the Department.
iv. Three external subject experts selected by the Chairperson of the
College governing body or equivalent statutory body from a panel
of five names approved by the relevant statutory bodies of the
affiliating university and recommended by the Vice-Chancellor.
Note: (1) Five members, including at least two external subject experts,
13
--- Page 15 ---
shall constitute the quorum,
(2) A teacher representing SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women /
Persons with disabilities is to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor
(a) if any of the candidates belonging to any of these categories is
the applicant and (b) if any of the members of the selection
committee does not belong to these categories.
(3) The recommendations of the Selection Committee shall be
placed before the Syndicate/ Executive Council /Board of
Management / Governing Body or equivalent statutory body of the
HEls for appropriate decision.
(4) At the time of recruitment in Universities and Colleges, a
service agreement should be _ executed between the
University/College and the teacher. A copy thereof shall be
deposited with the Registrar/Principal. Such service agreement
shall be duly stamped as per the government rates applicable.
5.0. Career Advancement Scheme (CAS)
5.1. General Conditions:
m
Faculty members selected through direct recruitment in HEls may be
eligible for promotion under the Career Advancement Scheme as per
the provisions given in these regulations.
. To avail of promotion under the CAS, the applicant should be an
employee of the HEI on the date of consideration by the Selection
Committee.
. For the purpose of assessment, all periods spent by the teacher on
different kinds of paid leaves such as Maternity Leave, Child Care
Leave, Study Leave, Medical Leave, and Deputation, shall be counted
subject to the condition that such leave/deputation is undertaken with
the prior approval of the competent authority following the due
procedure prescribed under applicable UGC guidelines/regulations
and / or government norms.
. The promotion under the CAS being a personal promotion to a teacher
holding a substantive sanctioned post, the said post shall revert back
to its original cadre on his/her superannuation.
. If a candidate fulfills the minimum eligibility criteria for promotion,
he/she may submit an application to the university at any time during
the year.
The inter-se seniority of a direct recruit shall be determined with
reference to the date of joining and for the teachers promoted under
the CAS with reference to the date of promotion as prescribed in these
regulations. The rules and regulations of the respective Central/State
Government shall apply for all other matters of seniority.
. Granting of Academic Level 15 to Professors at Academic Level 14:
Granting of Academic Level 15 to Professors at Academic Level 14
should be limited to 10% of professors positions at Academic Level 14.
14
--- Page 16 ---
The seniority level is strictly assigned by the date of promotion to
professor (Academic level 14) rather than the date of granting of
professor (Academic level 15).
5.2. Minimum Qualifications, Experience, and Accomplishments (For
the Disciplines of Arts, Commerce, Humanities, Education, Law,
Social Sciences, Sciences, Languages, Library Science, Physical
Education, Journalism & Mass Communication, Engineering/
Technology, Management, Drama, Yoga, Music, Performing Arts,
Visual Arts, and Other Traditional Indian Art Forms like Sculpture
etc.)
5.2. |. Eligibility Criteria for Assistant Professor (From Academic
Level 10 to 11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Associate Professor
(Academic Level 13 A), and Professor (Academic Level 14 and
Academic Level 15) in universities.
5.2. Il. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 10 to Academic Level
11)
a)
Eligibility:
An Assistant Professor who has completed (a) four years of
service with a Ph.D. degree (NCrF - Level 8) or (b) five years of
service with a M.Phil. or a PG Degree (NCrF - Level 7) or (c)
six years of service witha PG degree (NCrF - Level 6.5), and
satisfies the following conditions:
Attended one Orientation course of 21 days duration on
teaching methodology and completed any one of the following:
Refresher Course or Research Methodology Course or Faculty
Development Programme in online mode recognized by the
regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
Contributions such as one research publication in peer-
reviewed journals or publication of a book chapter or publication
of a book as an author or two books as a co-author by a reputed
publisher or one granted patents, during the assessment
period.
5.2. Ill. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 11 to Academic Level
12)
Eligibility:
An Assistant Professor who has completed five years of service
in Academic Level 11.
ii. A Ph.D. Degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
Completed any of the following: one Refresher Course or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized by
the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the
assessment period.
--- Page 17 ---
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.8 during the assessment period.
v. Contributions such as three research publications in peer-
reviewed journals or publication of three book chapters or
publication of a book as an author or two books as a co-author
by a reputed publisher or three granted patents during the
assessment period.
Note: A combination of research publications, book chapters
and granted patents totalling three can also be considered.
5.2. IV. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 12) to Associate
Professor (Academic Level 13A)
Eligibility:
i. An Assistant Professor who has completed three years of
service in Academic Level 12.
ii. A Ph.D. Degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. _ Completed any of the following: a Refresher Course or Faculty
Development Programme in online mode recognized by the
regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
V. Contributions such as three research publications in peer-
reviewed journals or, publication of three book chapters or
publication of a book as an author or two books as a co-author
by a reputed publisher or three granted patents during the
assessment period.
Note: A combination of research publications, book chapters and
granted patents totalling three can also be considered.
vi As a sole supervisor, at least one doctoral candidate
registered for a Ph.D. degree, or as a co-supervisor, two
doctoral candidates registered for Ph.D. degrees.
5.2. V. Associate Professor (Academic Level 13A) to Professor
(Academic Level 14)
Eligibility:
i. | An Associate Professor who has completed three years of
service in Academic Level 13 A.
ii. |APh.D. degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
iv. Contributions such as three research publications in peer-
reviewed journals or publication of three book chapters or
publication of a book as an author or two books as a co-
author by a reputed publisher or three granted patents during
16
--- Page 18 ---
the assessment period.
Note: A combination of research publications, book chapters
and granted patents totalling three can also be considered.
v. | Asasole supervisor at least one doctoral candidate awarded
Ph.D. degree or as a co-supervisor, two doctoral candidates
awarded Ph.D. degrees.
5.2. VI. Professor (Academic Level 14) to Professor (Academic
Level 15)
Eligibility:
i. A Professor who has completed ten years of service in
Academic Level 14 can be granted the Academic Level 15
on fulfillment of the following eligibility criteria:
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
iii. Contributions such as ten research publications in peer-
reviewed journals or publication of ten book chapters or
publication of three books as an author or six books as a co-
author by a reputed publisher or ten granted patents.
iv. Asa sole supervisor, at least five doctoral candidates were
awarded Ph.D. degrees, or as a co-supervisor, ten doctoral
candidates were awarded Ph.D. degrees.
v. | Favorable reviews from three eminent subject experts, out of
the panel of names approved by the relevant statutory bodies
of the university, who are not below the rank of a Professor
(Academic Level 15).
5.3. Eligibility Criteria for Assistant Professor (From Academic
Level 10 to 11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Associate Professor
(Academic Level 13 A), and Professor (Academic Level 14) in
colleges
5.3. I. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 10 to Academic
Level 11)
Eligibility:
a) An Assistant Professor who has completed (a) four years of
service with a Ph.D. degree (NCrF - Level 8) or (b) five years of
service with an M.Phil. or a PG Degree (NCrF - Level 7) or (c) six
years of service with a PG degree (NCrF - Level 6.5), and
satisfies the following conditions:
i. Attended one Orientation course of 21 days duration on
teaching methodology and completed any one of the following:
Refresher Course or Research Methodology Course or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized
by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
17
--- Page 19 ---
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
5.3 Il. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 11 to Academic Level
12)
Eligibility:
i. An Assistant Professor who has completed five years of
service in Academic Level 11.
ii. A Ph.D. Degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. Completed any of the following: one Refresher Course or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized
by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the
assessment period.
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.8 during the assessment period.
5.3.IIl. Assistant Professor (Academic Level 12) to Associate
Professor (Academic Level 13A)
Eligibility:
i. An Assistant Professor who has completed three years of service
in Academic Level 12.
ii. A Ph.D. degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. Completed any of the following: A Refresher Course or Faculty
Development Programme in online mode recognized by the
regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.8 during the assessment period.
5.3 IV. Associate Professor (Academic Level 13A) to Professor
(Academic Level 14)
Eligibility:
i. An Associate Professor who has completed three years of service
in Academic Level 13A.
i. A Ph.D. degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.8 during the assessment period.
iv. Aminimum of ten research publications in peer-reviewed journals
out of which three research publications shall be published during
the assessment period or a minimum of ten book chapters, out of
which three book chapters shall be published during the
assessment period or publication of four books out of which one
shall be published during the assessment period or ten granted
patents, out of which three shall be granted during the
assessment period.
Note: A combination of research papers or book chapters or
18
--- Page 20 ---
11):
granted patents totalling ten of which three shall be a combination
of research papers or book chapters or granted patents during the
assessment period or Publication of four books as an author or
eight books as a co-author by a reputed publisher out of which
one book as an author or two books as a co-author shall be
published during the assessment period.
5.4 Eligibility Criteria in University / College for Assistant Librarian
(From Academic Level 10 to 11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Deputy
Librarian (Academic Level 13 A), and Additional Librarian
(Academic Level 14)
5.4 |. Assistant Librarian (Academic level 10 to Academic level
Eligibility:
An Assistant Librarian in a University / College who has completed (a)
four years of service with a Ph.D. degree (NCrF - Level 8) or (b) five
years of service with an M.Phil. or a PG Degree (NCrF - Level 7) or
(c) six years of service with a PG degree (NCrF - Level 6.5), and
satisfies the following conditions:
i. Attended one Orientation course of 21 days duration and
completed any one of the following: Seminar/workshop/training
on automation and digitalization or short-term courses in online
mode recognized by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.)
during the assessment period.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.9 during the assessment period.
5.4.Il. Assistant Librarian (Academic level 11 to Academic level
12):
Eligibility:
i. Assistant Librarian in a University / College who has completed
five years of service in Academic Level 11.
ii. Completed any of the following: Seminar/workshop/training on
automation and digitalization or short-term courses in online
mode recognized by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.)
during the assessment period.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given
at 3.9 during the assessment period.
5.4. Ill. Assistant Librarian (Academic Level 12) to Deputy Librarian
(Academic Level 13A):
i. Assistant Librarian in a University / College who has completed
three years of service in Academic Level 12.
--- Page 21 ---
ii Completed any of the following: Seminar/workshop/training on
automation and digitalization or short-term courses in online mode
recognized by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the
assessment period.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given at
3.9 during the assessment period.
5.4 IV. Deputy Librarian (Academic Level 13A) to Additional
Librarian (Academic Level 14):
i. Deputy Librarian in a University / College who has completed three
years of service in Academic Level 13A.
ii. A Ph.D. Degree in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. Completed any of the following: Seminar/workshop/training on
automation and digitalization or short-term courses in online mode
recognized by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the
assessment period.
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine given at
3.9 during the assessment period.
Note: The above provisions shall apply only to the persons in the
librarian cadre employed in a library of a university or college.
5.5 Eligibility Criteria in University / College for Assistant Director
of Physical Education and Sports (From Academic Level 10 to
11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Deputy Director of Physical
Education and Sports (Academic Level 13 A), and Additional
Director of Physical Education and Sports (Academic Level 14)
5.5. I. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 10 to Academic Level 11)
Eligibility:
a. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports in a University
/ College who has completed (a) four years of service with a Ph.D.
degree (NCrF - Level 8) or (b) five years of service with an M.Phil.
degree or a PG Degree (NCrF - Level 7) or (c) six years of service
with a PG degree (NCrF - Level 6.5) and satisfies the following
conditions:
i. Attended one Orientation course of 21 days duration on
teaching methodology and completed any one of the following:
Refresher Course or Research Methodology Course, or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized
by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the
assessment period.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
20
--- Page 22 ---
given at 3.10 during the assessment period.
5.5.Il. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 11 to Academic Level 12)
i. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports in a
University / College who has completed five years of service
in Academic Level 11.
i Completed any of the following: one Refresher Course or
Research Methodology Course or Faculty Development
Programme in online mode recognized by the regulatory
bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.) during the assessment period.
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.10 during the assessment period.
5.5.Ill. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 12) to Deputy Director of Physical Education
and Sports (Academic Level 13A)
i. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports in a
University / College who has completed three years of
service in Academic Level 12.
i Completed any of the following: a Refresher Course or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized
by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
ii. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.10 during the assessment period.
5.5. IV. Deputy Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 13A) to Additional Director of Physical Education
and Sports (Academic Level 14):
i. Deputy Director of Physical Education and Sports in a
University / College who has completed three years of
service in Academic Level 13 A.
ii, A Ph.D. in the relevant/allied discipline.
iii. Completed any of the following: a Refresher Course or
Faculty Development Programme in online mode recognized
by the regulatory bodies (UGC, AICTE, etc.).
iv. Notable contributions in at least four areas out of the nine
given at 3.10 during the assessment period.
Note: The above provisions shall apply only to the persons in the
Physical Education and Sports cadre.
5.6 DATE OF ELIGIBILITY FOR PROMOTION:
1. When a candidate does not succeed in an assessment, he/she
can be re-assessed only after one year from the date of the last
21
--- Page 23 ---
assessment.
2. When a candidate succeeds in an assessment, his/her promotion
shall be effected as detailed below:
3. If the assessment is between 1% January and 30" June of a year,
promotion shall be granted from 1% July of the year.
4. Ifthe assessment is between 1% July and 31st December of a year,
promotion shall be granted from 1S January of the following year.
Note: (1) For all selection committees specified in these
regulations, the Head of Department should be either in the same
or higher rank/position than the rank/position for which the
interview is to be held. (2) The selection of candidates to a higher
position shall be based on the credentials and interaction with the
selection committee. (3) The recommendations of the Selection
Committee shall be placed before the Syndicate/ Executive
Council /Board of Management / Governing Body or equivalent
statutory body of the HEls for appropriate decision.
5.7 Composition of the Selection Committee in Universities and
Colleges
5.7. |. For Assistant Professor, Assistant Librarian, Assistant
Director of Physical Education and Sports (From Academic
Level 10 to 11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Associate Professor,
Deputy Librarian, Deputy Director of Physical Education and
Sports (Academic Level 13 A) and Professor, Additional
Librarian, Additional Director of Physical Education and Sports
(Academic Level 14) and Professor (Academic Level 15) in the
universities shall be the following:
i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Selection
Committee.
ii) A teacher not below the rank of Professor to be nominated by the
Visitor/Chancellor/Equivalent Authority, wherever applicable.
iii) Three external subject experts nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor, out of the panel of names approved by the relevant
statutory bodies of the university.
iv) Dean of the Faculty, wherever applicable.
v) Head/Chairperson of the Department/School.
vi) A teacher representing SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women / Persons
with disabilities is to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor (a) if
any of the candidates belonging to any of these categories is the
applicant and (b) if none of the members of the selection
committee belong to these categories.
Note: Five members, including at least two external subject experts,
shall constitute the quorum.
22
--- Page 24 ---
5.7. Il. For Assistant Professor, Assistant Librarian, Assistant
Director of Physical Education and Sports (From Academic
Level 10 to 11, Academic Level 11 to 12), Associate Professor,
Deputy Librarian, Deputy Director of Physical Education and
Sports (Academic Level 13 A) and Professor, Additional
Librarian and Additional Director of Physical Education and
Sports (Academic Level 14) in the colleges shall be the
following:
i) The Chairperson of the Governing Body or equivalent statutory
body of the college shall be the Chairperson.
ii) The Principal of the College.
iii) Head of the Department.
iv) Three external subject experts selected by the Chairperson of
the College governing body or equivalent statutory body from a
panel of five names approved by the relevant statutory bodies
of the affiliating university and recommended by the Vice-
Chancellor.
v) A teacher representing SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women /
Persons with disabilities is to be nominated by the Vice-
Chancellor (a) if any of the candidates belonging to any of these
categories is the applicant and (b) if any of the members of the
selection committee does not belong to these categories.
Note: Five members, including at least two external subject
experts, shall constitute the quorum.
6.0 Counting of Past Services for Direct Recruitment and
Promotion under CAS
Previous regular service rendered in National or International HEls
or research organizations as a Post-Doctoral Fellow shall be counted
for Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Professor, and other
academic staff, provided that:
(a) The essential qualifications of the post held were not lower than
the qualifications prescribed in these regulations.
(b) The position held should be of an equivalent grade to the
existing scale or of the pre-revised scale of pay.
(c) The position held should be in the regular mode and not in a
guest or part-time mode.
(d) The previous full-time Ad-hoc or contractual service (by
whatever nomenclature it may be called) shall be counted,
provided that:
(i) In the case of Indian HEls or research organizations, the
incumbent was appointed on the recommendation of a duly
constituted Selection Committee as per UGC regulations. In
23
--- Page 25 ---
7.0.
the case of international HEIs or research organizations, the
incumbent was appointed as per the rules of the respective
international HEls or research organizations;
(ii)The incumbent was drawing total gross emoluments, as per
the prescribed pay scale communicated by UGC, not less
than the monthly gross emoluments of a regularly appointed
Assistant Professor or Associate Professor or Professor as
the case may be (Salary certificate should be supported by
authenticated proof such as ITR in case of Indian HEls or
research organizations and through other authenticated
proof for international HEls or research organizations).
(e) No distinctions shall be made with reference to the nature of
management of the institution where the previous service was
rendered (private/public) while counting the past service under this
clause.
Minimum Qualifications, Experience, Accomplishments,
Tenure, Selection Committee and Selection Procedure for the
appointment of Principal (for UG college - Academic level 13A
and for PG college - Academic level 14):
7.1.
i.
Minimum Qualifications, Experience, and Accomplishments
Ph.D. degree.
For PG colleges, a Professor/Associate Professor with a total
experience of at least fifteen years of teaching/research in HEls
is essential. For UG colleges, a Professor/Associate Professor
with a total experience of at least ten years of teaching/research
in HEls is essential.
A minimum of ten research publications in peer-reviewed
journals or publication of ten book chapters or publication of four
books as an author or eight books as a co-author by a reputed
publisher or ten granted patents. A combination of research
publications, book chapters, and granted patents totalling ten
can also be considered.
Note: The research publications should be in peer-reviewed
journals, and the book chapter or book must be published by a
recognized academic or professional publisher with a reputation
for rigorous peer review and quality editing. Self-published book
chapters or books will not be considered. The selection
committee shall decide whether the research publications are
in a peer-reviewed journal, whether the publication of a
book/book chapter is by a reputed publisher, and whether the
contributions are notable, based on the recommendations of the
three external experts of the selection committee constituted in
accordance with these regulations.
24
--- Page 26 ---
7.2Tenure
i) A Principal shall be appointed for a period of five years, with
eligibility for reappointment for one more term by following the
procedure prescribed for selection of Principal. However,
she/he can serve as a Principal for only two terms in the same
college.
ii) After completing his/her terms as Principal, the incumbent shall
rejoin his/her parent organization with the designation of
professor and in the professor grade, provided he/she fulfills the
eligibility criteria for professor.
7.3 Selection Procedure and Selection Committee:
The Selection of the Principal shall be through an all India
newspaper advertisement and by a duly constituted Selection
Committee as per the provisions made under these regulations.
The Selection Committee for the post of Principal shall have the
following composition:
i) The Chairperson of the Governing Body or equivalent
statutory body of the college shall be the Chairperson.
ii) One member of the Governing Body or equivalent statutory
body of the college to be nominated by the Chairperson who
shall be an expert in academic administration.
iii) Three external experts nominated by the Vice-Chancellor of
the affiliating university, out of the panel of names approved
by the relevant statutory bodies of the university.
Note: (1) Four members, including at least two external experts,
shall constitute the quorum, (2) A teacher representing
SC/ST/OBC/ Minority / Women / Persons with disabilities, is to be
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor (a) if any of the candidates
belonging to any of these categories is the applicant and (b) if any
of the members of the selection committee do not belong to these
categories (3) The recommendations of the Selection Committee
shall be placed before the Syndicate/ Executive Council /Board of
Management / Governing Body or equivalent statutory body of the
HEls for appropriate decision.
8.0. Appointments on Contract Basis
The teachers may be appointed against the vacant sanctioned
faculty positions on a contract basis for a maximum period of six
months, only when it is essential. The qualifications and selection
procedure for appointing them should be the same as those
applicable to a regularly appointed teacher. The fixed total
emoluments paid to such contract teachers should not be less than
the monthly gross salary of a regularly appointed Assistant
Professor. Such appointments should not be made for more than
25
--- Page 27 ---
one academic session and may be renewed after review for
another academic session.
9.0. Professor of Practice:
HEIs may engage experts/professionals/practitioners from
industries/other professions for teaching and research. The
engagement of the Professor of Practice will be exclusive of the
sanctioned posts. The number of Professors of Practice in a HEI,
at any point in time, should not exceed 10% of the sanctioned
posts in a HEI. The provisions given in the UGC Guidelines for
engaging Professors of Practice in HEls shall be applicable with
regard to tenure, selection procedure, duties and responsibilities,
etc.
10.0 Minimum Qualifications, Experience, Accomplishments,
Selection Committee, and Selection Procedure for the
Appointment of Vice-Chancellor in Universities.
10.1 Vice-Chancellor
A distinguished person possessing high academic qualifications
and demonstrated administrative and leadership capabilities,
strong alignment to constitutional values, strong social
commitment, belief in teamwork, pluralism, ability to work with
diverse people, with a flair for innovation and a global outlook in
higher education, along with the overall vision of the institution and
abilities to manage complex situations with a minimum of ten years
of experience as (i) a Professor in an HEI or (ii) at a senior level in
reputed research or academic administrative organizations or (iii)
at a senior level in industry, public administration, public policy
and/or public sector undertakings, with a proven track record of
significant academic or scholarly contributions, shall be eligible to
be appointed as Vice-Chancellor.
. The selection for the Vice-Chancellor post shall be through an all
India newspaper advertisement and _ public _ notification.
Applications can also be sought through nomination or a talent
search process by a Search cum Selection Committee.
The Chancellor/Visitor shall constitute the Search cum Selection
Committee comprising three experts. The members of such
Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be eminent persons with a
proven track record of excellence (either Directors/Vice
Chancellors or former Directors/Vice Chancellors of HEls) and
shall not be connected in any manner with the University
concerned or its colleges. If the Vice-Chancellor or any member
of the EC/Syndicate/ BoM/Equivalent body is an applicant for the
Vice-Chancellor’s post, they have to recuse themselves from the
meeting during the discussion of the agenda item wherein the
26
--- Page 28 ---
nominee of the EC/Syndicate/ BoM/Equivalent body is to be
decided. In case of violation, the applicant shall be disqualified as
a candidate for the post of Vice-Chancellor.
iv. The following shall be the constitution of the Search cum Selection
Committee.
a) a nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, who shall be the
Chairperson of the Search cum Selection Committee.
b) a nominee of the Chairman, University Grants Commission.
c) anominee of the apex body of the university such as Syndicate/
Senate/Executive Council / Board of Management/ Equivalent
Body of the University.
v. The conditions of service of the Vice Chancellor shall be prescribed
in the Statutes of the respective University in conformity with these
Regulations.
vi. The composition of the Search cum Selection Committee shall be
mandatory for the selection of Vice-Chancellors of all Universities
established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, Provincial
Act or State Act and recognized under Clause (f) of Section 2 of
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and every Institution
deemed to be a University under Section 3 of the said Act.
vii. The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall short-list the
candidates and interact with the short-listed candidates to prepare
a panel of 3-5 names for submission to the Visitor/Chancellor.
viii. The Visitor/Chancellor of the university shall appoint the Vice-
Chancellor out of the panel of names recommended by the
Search-cum-Selection Committee.
ix. The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he or she enters upon his or her office or until
he or she attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier,
and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by
following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of Vice-
Chancellor:
x. The term of office of the Vice-Chancellor shall form part of the
service period of the incumbent, making him/ her eligible for all
service-related benefits.
xi. If a Vice-Chancellor is not appointed as per these regulations,
such an appointment shall be null and void.
11.0 Consequences of Violation of UGC Regulations
If any HEI violates the provisions of these regulations, the
Commission shall constitute an enquiry committee to look into the
27
--- Page 29 ---
violations. If the violations are established by the enquiry committee
set up by the Commission, the HEI shall be:—
(a) Debarred from participating in UGC schemes.
(b) Debarred from offering degree programmes.
(c) Debarred from offering ODL and online mode programmes.
(d) Removed from the list of HEls maintained under Sections 2(f) and
12B of UGC Act 1956.
The HEI shall be subjected to one or more of the above actions.
Further, UGC may take additional punitive actions as per the decision
of the Commission on a case-to-case basis.
12.0 Interpretation:
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency with respect to these
regulations, the interpretation given by the Commission shall be
final and binding.
wRRK
28
--- Page 30 ---
DRAFT GUIDELINES ON CADRE RATIO, PERIOD OF PROBATION &
CONFIRMATION, LEAVES, TEACHING DAYS, ACADEMIC, RESEARCH AND
ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITMENTS , SENIORITY AND CODE OF
PROFESSIONAL ETHICS FOR TEACHERS AND OTHER ACADEMIC STAFF IN
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES
Promotion and co-ordination of University education is the general duty of the UGC. These UGC
guidelines are for maintaining cadre ratio, service conditions, research and administrative commitments,
code of professional ethics, etc., for teachers and other academic staff in HEIs.
1. Cadre Ratio for Teaching Posts
Teaching posts in universities, as far as feasible, may be created in a pyramidal order, for
instance, for one post of Professor, there shall be two posts of Associate Professors and
four posts of Assistant Professor, per department.
All the sanctioned/approved posts in the university system shall be filled up on an urgent
basis.
2. Period of Probation and Confirmation
The minimum period of probation for a teacher shall be one year, extendable by one more
year with reasons recorded in writing. The teacher on probation shall be confirmed at the
end of the probation period if the performance is found to be satisfactory.
3. Teaching Days
Given the focus of the National Credit Framework (NCrF) on holistic education, teachers
are required to play a key role in the implementation of NCrF. The Universities/Colleges
shall have at least 15 weeks of teaching-learning days in a semester. The remaining period
may be devoted to research and other administrative activities.
In-lieu of the curtailment of vacation by 2 weeks, the university teachers may be credited
with1/3™ of the period of their earned leave. However, colleges may have an option of a
total vacation of 10 weeks in a year and no earned leave except when required to work
during the vacations for which, as in the case of University teachers, 1/3" of the period
shall be credited as Earned Leave.
4. Academic, Research and Administrative Commitments
4.1 As per the National Credit Framework (NCrF), teaching-learning processes include
classroom teaching, practical, innovation labs, class projects, assignments, tutorials;
sports and games, physical activities, social work, NCC, examinations, assessments;
vocational education, training and skilling, project work, field visits, internship,
apprenticeship, etc. Considering the shifting of focus from classroom education to
competency and outcome-based learning, the work commitments of the teachers in full
employment should not be less than eight hours per working day.
4.2 The time spent by teachers in teaching-learning processes and the time used for
research and other academic activities shall be decided by the HEIs considering the
multi-disciplinary education that needs to be promoted in higher education. Teachers
are required to be present at the workplace of the HEI during working hours.
Page 1 of 13
--- Page 31 ---
However, in case a teacher has administrative responsibilities during the semester, the HEI
may consider reducing the number of hours per week spent by the teacher in teaching-
learning processes by formulating an institutional procedure.
5. Leaves: General Conditions and Types:
5.1 General Conditions:
iii.
Vi.
Leave cannot be claimed as a matter of right. When exigencies of service so
require, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any kind is reserved by the leave
sanctioning authority.
The teacher may be granted leave only on his/her request. The teacher shall not be
compelled to proceed on leave except on a disciplinary ground. The Competent
Authority may sanction the leave applied for, and shall not alter the nature of leave,
except with the request/consent of the teacher.
Application for leave on medical grounds shall be accompanied by a certificate of
Registered Medical Practitioner holding, graduate degree; Bachelor of Medicine
and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) or its equivalent) indicating the nature and
probable duration of the illness. The teacher returning from leave on medical
grounds shall produce a certificate of fitness.
If the teacher frequently applies for medical leave with short intervals, he may be
referred to the Medical Authority to examine the state of his health, the period of
recovery, and whether he would be fit for duty after rest and treatment.
The teacher on leave shall not engage himself/herself in any other employment,
trade or business, either full-time or part-time except public service of casual nature
or such other work.
Ordinarily, the teacher shall resume his duties immediately after the period of leave
sanctioned, otherwise it shall be construed as overstay and may entail refusal of
leave or leave salary and may be treated as misconduct unless the Competent
Authority condones the irregularity, for reasons to be recorded.
5.2. Duty Leave:
Duty leave up to 30 days in an academic year may be granted for:
i. Attending Orientation Programme, Refresher Course, Research Methodology
Workshop, Faculty Induction Programme, Conference, Congresses, Symposia
and Seminar, as a delegate nominated by the university or with the permission
of the university/college ;
ii. Delivering lectures in institutions and universities at the invitation of such
institutions or universities received by the university, and accepted by the Vice-
Chancellor/Principal of the College;
iii. Working in another Indian or foreign university, any other agency, institution or
organisation, when so deputed by the university/College;
iv. Work related to funded research projects and Startup companies;
Page 2 of 13
--- Page 32 ---
v. Participating in a delegation or working on a committee appointed by the
Central Government, State Government, the UGC, a sister university or any other
similar academic body; and
vi. For performing any other duty assigned to him/her by the university/college.
a) The duration of leave should be such as may be considered necessary by the
sanctioning authority on each occasion.
b) The leave may be granted on full pay, provided, that if the teacher receives
a fellowship or honorarium or any other financial assistance beyond the
amount needed for normal expenses, he/she may be sanctioned duty leave
on reduced pay and allowances.
a
c) Duty leave may be combined with earned leave, half pay leave or
extraordinary leave, or Casual leave.
AS7
d) Duty leave should also be given for attending meetings in the UGC, DST,
etc., where a teacher is invited to share his/her expertise with an academic
body, government agency, or NGO.
Ro
5.3 Study Leave For Entry Level Assistant Professor/Assistant Librarian/Assistant
Director Of Physical Education And Sports:
i.
ii.
iil.
Iv.
The scheme of Study Leave provides an opportunity to avail of
scholarships/fellowships awarded to the faculty who wish to acquire new
knowledge and to improve analytical skills. When a teacher is awarded a
scholarship or stipend or fellowship (by whatever nomenclature called), for
pursing further studies, leading to a Ph.D./Post- doctoral qualification or for
undertaking a research project in a higher education institution abroad, the amount
of the scholarship/Stipend/fellowship shall not be linked to the recipient‘s
pay/salary paid to him/her by his /her parent institution. The awardee shall be paid
salary for the entire duration of fellowship/scholarship, provided, that he/she does
not take up any other remunerative jobs, like teaching, in the host country.
A teacher on Study Leave shall not take up, during the period of that leave, any
regular or part-time appointment under an organisation in India or abroad.
The study leave shall be granted to only an entry-level appointee as Assistant
Professor/Assistant Librarian/Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports
after a minimum of three years of continuous service. Associate Professor, Deputy
Librarian, Deputy Director of Physical Education and Sports, Additional Librarian,
Additional Director of Physical Education and Sports, Additional Director of
Physical Education and Sports or Professor, Librarian and Director of Physical
Education and Sports of a University/College/Institution are not eligible for study
leave.
The study leave shall be granted by the Executive Council/Syndicate on the
recommendation of the Head ofthe Department concerned. The leave shall not be
granted for more than three years in one spell, save in exceptional cases, in which
the Executive Council/Syndicate is satisfied that such extension is unavoidable
on academic grounds and_ necessary in the interest of the
University/College/Institution.
The study leave shall not be granted to an Assistant Professor/Assistant
Page 3 of 13
--- Page 33 ---
vi.
Vii.
viii.
ix.
Xi.
xii.
Librarian/Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports who is due to
retire within five years of the date on which he/she is expected to return to duty
after the expiry of study leave.
The study leave shall be granted not more than twice during one’s entire career.
However, the maximum period of study leave admissible during the entire service
shall not exceed five years.
No teacher who has been granted study leave shall be permitted to alter
substantially the course of study orthe programme of research without the
permission of the Executive Council/Syndicate, in the event the course of study
falls short of study leave sanctioned, the teacher shall resume duty on the conclusion
of the course of study unless the previous approval of the Executive
Council/Syndicate to treat the period of short- fall as Extra-Ordinary leave has been
obtained.
With the approval of the Executive Council/Syndicate, the study leave may be
combined with the earned leave, half-pay leave, extra-ordinary leave at the credit
of the teacher. When the study leave is taken in continuation of vacation, the period
of study leave shall be deemed to begin to run on the expiry of the vacation. A
teacher, who is selected to a higher post during the study leave, shall be placed in
that position and shall get the higher scale only after joining the post.
The period of study leave shall count as service for the purpose of the retirement
benefits (pension/contributory provident fund), provided that the teacher rejoins the
University/College/Institution on the expiry of his/her study leave, and serves the
institution for the period for which the Bond has been executed.
The study leave granted to a teacher shall be deemed to have been cancelled
in case it is not availed ofwithin 12 months of its sanction. Provided that where
the study leave granted has been so cancelled, the teacher may apply again for such
leave.
A teacher availing of the study leave shall undertake to serve the
University/College/Institution for a continuous period of at least three years to
be calculated from the date of resuming duty on the expiry of the study leave.
A teacher -
(a) who is unable to complete his/her studies within the period of study leave
granted to him/her or
(b) who fails to rejoin the services of the University on the expiry of his/her study
leave or
(c) who rejoins the service of the university but leaves the service without
completing the prescribed period of service after rejoining the service or
(d) who, within the said period, is dismissed or removed from the service by the
University shall be liable to refund, to the University/College/Institution, the
amount of the leave salary and allowances and other expenses, incurred on the
teacher or paid to him/her or on his/her behalf in connection with the course of
study.
Page 4 of 13
--- Page 34 ---
Explanation:
If a teacher asks for extension of the study leave and is not granted the extension but does
not rejoin duty onthe expiry of the leave originally sanctioned, he/she shall be deemed to
have failed to rejoin the service on the expiry of his/her leave for the purpose of recovery
of dues under these guidelines.
If the Executive Council or Syndicate permits a teacher to retire within three years of
return to duty from study leave on medical grounds or any other exceptional ground, the
Executive Council/Syndicate may waive or reduce the amount refundable by a teacher
under these guidelines:
i.
iii.
After the leave has been sanctioned, the teacher shall, before availing of the leave,
execute a bond in favour of the University/College/Institution, binding himself/herself
for the due fulfillment of the conditions laid down in paragraph (ix) to (xii) above and
give security of immovable property to the satisfaction of the Finance Officer/Treasurer
or a fidelity bond of an insurance company or a guarantee by a scheduled bank or furnish
security of two permanent teachers for the amount which might become refundable to
the University/College/Institutions in accordance with paragraph (ix) to (xii) above.
i. The teacher on study leave shall submit to the Registrar/Principal of his/her parent
University/College/Institution six-monthly reports of progress in his/her studies from
his/her supervisor or the Head of the institution. Such report shall reach the
Registrar/Principal within one month of the expiry of every six months of the period of
the study leave. If the report does not reach the Registrar/Principal within the specified
time, the payment of leave salary may be deferred till the receipt of such report.
The teacher on leave shall submit a comprehensive report on the completion of the
study leave period. A copy of the research document/monograph/academic paper
produced during the period of the study leave shall be put in the public domain,
preferably on the website of the University/College/Institution.
5.4 Sabbatical Leave:
i.
iii.
The permanent, whole-time teachers of the university and colleges who have
completed seven yearsof service as an Associate Professor or a Professor may be
granted sabbatical leave to undertake study or research or any other academic pursuit
solely for the object of increasing their proficiency and usefulness to the university and
higher education system. The duration of leave shall not exceed one year, at a time,
and two years in the entire career of the teacher.
A teacher shall, during the period of sabbatical leave, be paid full pay and allowances
(subject to the prescribed conditions being fulfilled) at the rates applicable to him/her
immediately prior to his/her proceeding on sabbatical leave.
A teacher on sabbatical leave shall not take up, during the period of that leave, any
regular appointment under another organisation in India or abroad. He/she may,
however, be allowed to accept a fellowship or a research scholarship or ad hoc
teaching and research assignment with honorarium or any other form of assistance,
other than the regular employment in an institution of advanced studies.
During the period of sabbatical leave, the teacher shall be allowed to draw the increment
on the due date. The period of leave shall also count as service for purposes of
Page 5 of 13
--- Page 35 ---
pension/contributory provident fund, provided that the teacher rejoins the university on
the expiry of his/her leave.
5.5 Other Kinds of Leave Rules for Permanent Teachers of the Universities/ Colleges:
5.6
5.7
The following kinds of leave would be admissible to permanent teachers:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
Leave treated as duty, viz. casual leave, special casual leave, and duty leave;
Leave earned by duty, viz. earned leave, half-pay leave, and commuted leave;
Leave not earned by duty, viz. extraordinary leave; and leave not due;
Leave not debited to leave account
Leave for academic pursuits, viz. study leave, sabbatical leave and academic leave;
Leave on grounds of health, viz., maternity leave and quarantine leave.
Casual Leave
i.
Sp
1.
The total casual leave granted to a teacher shall not exceed eight days in an academic
year.
ii. Casual leave cannot be combined with any other kind of leave except special casual
leave. However, such casual leave may be combined with holidays including Sundays.
Holidays or Sundays falling within the period of casual leave shall not be counted as
casual leave.
ecial Casual Leave
Special casual leave, not exceeding 10 days in an academic year, may be granted to
a teacher:
To conduct examination of a university/Public Service Commission/Board of
Examination or any other similar body/institution; and
iii To inspect academic institutions attached to a statutory board.
In computing the 10 days leave admissible, the days of actual journey, if any, to and
from the places where activities specified above, take place, will be excluded.
In addition, special casual leave to the extent mentioned below, may also be granted;
To undergo sterilization operation (vasectomy or salpingectomy) under the family
welfare programme.
ii. Leave, in this case, shall be restricted to six working days; and
. To a female teacher who undergoes non-puerperal sterilization. Leave, in this case,
shall be restricted to 14 days.
The special casual leave shall not accumulate, nor can it be combined with any other
kind of leave except the casual leave. It may be granted in combination with holidays
or vacations by the sanctioning authority on each occasion.
6. Earned Leave
6.1 Earned leave admissible to a teacher shall be:
6.1.1 1/30th of the actual service, including vacation; plus
6.1.2 1/3rd of the period, if any, during which he/she is required to perform duty
during thevacation.
Page 6 of 13
--- Page 36 ---
7.
For purposes of computation of the period of actual service, all periods of leave,
except casual, special casual, and duty leave, shall be excluded.
6.1.3 Earned leave at the credit of a teacher shall not accumulate beyond 300 days.
The maximum period of earned leave that may be sanctioned at a time shall not
exceed 60 days. Earned leave exceeding 60 days may, however, be sanctioned
in the case of higher study or training, or leave with a medical certificate, or
when the entire leave, or a portion thereof, is spent outside India.
For removal of doubt, it may be clarified :
1. When a teacher combines vacation with earned leave, the period of
vacation shall be reckoned as a leave in calculating the maximum
amount of leave on average pay which may be included in the particular
period of leave.
2. Incase where only a portion of the leave is spent outside India, the grant
of leave in excess of 120 days shall be subject to the condition that the
portion of the leave spent in India shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 120
days.
3. Encashment of earned leave shall be allowed to members of the teaching
staff as applicable to the employees of the Central Government or State
Government.
Half-pay Leave
71
7.2
Half-pay leave may be sanctioned for a period of 20 days to a permanent teacher for
each completed year of service. Such leave may be granted on the basis of a medical
certificate from a registered medical practitioner for any private affairs or for any
academic purpose.
Explanation:
A "completed year of service" means the continuous service of a specified duration
under the university and includes periods of absence from duty as well as leave,
including extraordinary leave.
Note: Half-pay leave shall be combined with earned leave for calculating the number
of earned leaves in case the number of earned leaves is less than 300 for the purpose
of encashment of leave at the time of superannuation as applicable to the employees of
the Government of India/State Government.
8. Commuted Leave
Commuted leave, not exceeding half the amount of half-pay leave due, may be granted
to a permanent teacher on the basis of a medical certificate from a registered medical
practitioner subject to the following conditions:
8.1 Commuted leave during the entire service shall be limited to a maximum of
240 days;
8.2 When commuted leave is granted, twice the amount of such leave shall be
debited against the half-pay leave account; and
8.3. The total duration of earned leave and commuted leave taken in conjunction
shall not exceed 240 days at a time;
Provided that no commuted leave shall be granted under these guidelines unless the
Page 7 of 13
--- Page 37 ---
authority competent to sanction leave has reason to believe that the teacher would
return to duty on its expiry.
9. Extraordinary Leave
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
A permanent teacher may be granted extraordinary leave when:
9.1.1. No other leave is admissible; or
9.1.2 Other leave is admissible, and the teacher applies in writing for the grant
of extraordinary leave.
The extraordinary leave shall always be without pay and allowances. It shall
not count for an increment except in the following cases:
9.2.1. Leave taken on the basis of medical certificates;
9.2.2 Cases where the Vice-Chancellor/Principal is satisfied that the leave was
taken due to causes beyond the control of the teacher, such as inability
to join or rejoin duty due to civil commotion or a natural calamity and
the teacher has no other kind of leave to his credit;
9.2.3 Leave taken for pursuing higher studies; and
9.2.4 Leave granted to accept an invitation to a teaching post or fellowship
or research-cum- teaching post or on assignment for technical or
academic work of importance.
Extraordinary leave may be combined with any other leave except the casual
leave and special casual leave, provided that the total period of continuous
absence from duty on leave (including periods of vacation when such vacation
is taken in conjunction with leave) shall not exceed three years, except in cases
where the leave is taken on medical certificate. The total period of absence from
duty shall, in no case, exceed five years in the entire service period of the
individual.
The authority empowered to grant leave may commute retrospectively the
periods of absence without the leave into extraordinary leave.
10. ‘Leave Not Due’
10.1
10.2
10.3
“Leave not due’, may, at the discretion of the Vice-Chancellor/Principal, be
granted to a permanent teacher for a period not exceeding 360 days during the
entire period of service, out of which not more than 90 days at a time and 180
days, in all, maybe otherwise than on a medical certificate. Such leave shall be
debited against the half-pay leave earned by him/her subsequently.
"Leave not due’ shall not be granted unless the Vice-Chancellor/Principal is
satisfied that, as far as can reasonably be foreseen, the teacher will return to duty
on the expiry of the leave and earn the leave granted.
A teacher to whom ‘leave not due' is granted shall not be permitted to tender
his/her resignation from service so long as the debit balance in his/her leave
account is not wiped off by active service or he/she refunds the amount paid
to him/her as pay and allowances for the period not so earned. In acase where
retirement is unavoidable on account of reason of ill-health or incapacitating the
teacher for further service, a refund of leave salary for the period of leave yet to
Page 8 of 13
--- Page 38 ---
11.
12.
13.
14,
15.
16.
be earned may be waived by the Executive Council/College Governing Body.
Provided that the Executive Council/College Governing Body may waive off, in any other
exceptional case, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the refund of leave salary for the
period of leave yet to be earned.
Maternity Leave
11.1 Maternity leave on full pay may be granted to a woman teacher for a period not
exceeding 180 days, to be availed of twice in the entire career. Maternity leave
may also be granted in case of miscarriage, including abortion, subject to the
condition that the total leave granted in respect of this to a woman teacher in her
career is not more than 45 days, and the application for leave is supported by a
medical certificate.
11.2 Maternity leave may be combined with any earned leave, half-pay leave or
extraordinary leave, but any leave applied for in continuation of the maternity
leave may be granted if the request is supported by a medical certificate.
Child-care Leave
Women teachers having any minor child/children may be granted leave for up to a
period of two years for taking care of the minor child/children. The child-care leave for
a maximum period of two years (730 days) may be granted to the woman teachers during
the entire service period in line with the Central Government women employees. In the
cases where the child-care leave is granted for more than 45 days, the
University/College/Institution may appoint a part-time / guest substitute teacher with
intimation to the UGC.
Paternity Leave
Paternity leave of 15 days may be granted to male teachers during the confinement of
their wives, and such leave shall be granted only up to two children.
Adoption leave
Adoption leave may be provided as per the rules of the Central Government.
Surrogacy leave
Leave for Surrogacy shall be applicable as per the Rules, guidelines and Norms as laid
down by the Government of India.
Code of Professional Ethics
I. Teachers and their Responsibilities :
Whoever adopts teaching as a profession assumes the obligation to conduct
himself/herself in accordance with the ideal of the profession. A teacher is
constantly under the scrutiny of his students and the society at large. Therefore,
every teacher should see that there is no incompatibility between his precepts and
practice. The national ideals of education which have already been set forth and
which he/she should seek to inculcate among students must be his/her own ideals.
The profession further requires that the teacher should be calm, patient and
communicative by temperament and amiable in disposition.
Teacher should:
(i) Adhere to a responsible pattern of conduct and demeanour expected
of them by the community;
Page 9 of 13
--- Page 39 ---
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
Manage their private affairs in a manner consistent with the dignity
of the profession;
Seek to make professional growth continuous through study and
research;
Express free and frank opinion by participation at professional
meetings, seminars, conferences etc., towards the contribution of
knowledge;
Maintain active membership of professional organisations and strive
to improve education andprofession through them;
Perform their duties in the form of teaching, tutorials, practicals,
seminars and research workconscientiously and with dedication;
Discourage and not indulge in plagiarism and other non-ethical
behaviour in teaching and research;
Abide by the Act, Statute and Ordinance of the University and respect
its ideals, vision, mission, cultural practices and tradition;
Co-operate and assist in carrying out the functions relating to the
educational responsibilities of the college and the university, such as:
assisting in appraising applications for admission, advising and
counselling students as well as assisting in the conduct of university
and college examinations, including supervision, invigilation and
evaluation; and
Participate in extension, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities,
including community service.
Il. Teachers and students
Teachers should:
@)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
Respect the rights and dignity of the student in expressing his/her
opinion;
Deal justly and impartially with students regardless of their religion,
caste, gender, political, economic, social and physical characteristics;
Recognise the difference in aptitude and capabilities among students
and strive to meet their individual needs;
Encourage students to improve their attainments, develop their
personalities and at the same timecontribute to community welfare;
Inculcate among students scientific temper, spirit of inquiry and
ideals of democracy, patriotism, social justice, environmental
protection and peace;
Treat the students with dignity and not behave in a vindictive
manner towards any of them for anyreason;
Pay attention to only the attainment of the student in the assessment
of merit;
Make themselves available to the students even beyond their class
hours and help and guide students without any remuneration or
Page 10 of 13
--- Page 40 ---
(ix)
(x)
reward;
Aid students to develop an understanding of our national heritage and
national goals; and
Refrain from inciting students against other students, colleagues or
administration.
ul. Teachers and Colleagues
Teachers should: -
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Treat other members of the profession in the same manner as they
themselves wish to be treated;
Speak respectfully of other teachers and render assistance for
professional betterment;
Refrain from making unsubstantiated allegations against colleagues
to higher authorities; and
Refrain from allowing considerations of caste, creed, religion, race or
sex in their professionalendeavour.
Iv. Teachers and Authorities :
Teachers should:
@)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
Discharge their professional responsibilities according to the existing
rules and adhere to procedures and methods consistent with their
profession in initiating steps through their own institutional bodies
and / or professional organisations for change of any such rule
detrimental to the professional interest;
Refrain from undertaking any other employment and commitment,
including private tuitions and coaching classes, which are likely to
interfere with their professional responsibilities;
Co-operate in the formulation of policies of the institution by accepting
various offices and discharging responsibilities which such offices may
demand;
Co-operate through their organisations in the formulation of policies
of the other institutions and accept offices;
Co-operate with the authorities for the betterment of the institutions
keeping in view the interest and in conformity with the dignity of the
profession;
Adhere to the terms of the contract;
Give and expect due notice before a change of position takes place;
and
Refrain from availing themselves of leave except on unavoidable
grounds and as far as practicablewith prior intimation, keeping in
view their particular responsibility for completion of academic
schedule.
Page 11 of 13
--- Page 41 ---
17.
18.
v. Teachers and Non-Teaching Staff :
Teachers should :
@)
(ii)
Treat the non-teaching staff as colleagues and equal partners in a
cooperative undertaking, within every educational institution;
Help in the functioning of joint-staff councils covering both the
teachers and the non-teaching staff.
vi. Teachers and Society
Teachers should:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(vy)
Recognise that education is a public service and strive to keep the
public informed of the educational programmes which are being
provided;
Work to improve education in the community and strengthen the
community's moral and intellectual life ;
Be aware of social problems and take part in such activities as would
be conducive to the progress of society and hence the country as a
whole;
Perform the duties of citizenship, participate in community activities
and shoulder responsibilities of public offices;
Refrain from taking part in or subscribing to, or assisting in any way
activities which tend to promote feelings of hatred or enmity among
different communities, religions or linguistic groups but actively
work for national integration.
Maintenance of Standards in Higher-Education Institutions:
In order to maintain the academic standards in higher education, the following
recommendations shall be adopted by the respective Universities/Colleges/Institutions:
i. The process of evaluation for Ph.D. shall be uniform in all the universities in
accordance with the respective UGC regulations and their amendments from time
to time in this regard.
ii, All newly recruited Assistant Professors/Assistant Librarians/Assistant Directors
of Physical Education and Sports should undergo an Orientation Course, in online
mode, recognized by regulatory bodies such as UGC, AICTE, etc.
Allowances and Benefits
() Other allowances and benefits, such as Hometown Travel Concession,
Leave Travel Concession, Special Compensatory Allowances, Children’s
Education Allowance, Transport Allowance, House Rent Allowance,
House Building Allowance, Deputation Allowance, Travelling Allowance,
Dearness Allowance, Area-based Special Compensatory Allowance etc.
for teachers and Library and Physical Education and Sports Cadres, shall
Page 12 of 13
--- Page 42 ---
be as applicable to the Central /State Government employees and be
governed by the relevant rules as notified by the Central/State
Governments from time to time.
(ii) Pension, Gratuity, ex-gratia compensation etc., as applicable to
Central/State Government employees shall also be applicable to teachers
and Library and Physical Education and Sports Cadres of Central/State
Universities and Colleges, including affiliated and constituent Colleges as
the case may be.
(iii) Medical Benefits: All medical benefits for teachers and Library and
Physical Education Cadres, shall be as applicable to the Central /State
Government employees. Further, the Teachers and Library and Physical
Education Cadres may be placed under the Central Government Health
Scheme or any other such scheme of the Central Government/ Health
Scheme of the respective State Government, as the case may be, for
Central/State Universities/Colleges respectively.
TBR ARK oR
Page 13 of 13