--- Page 1 ---
Fair-Weather Friends Are No Friends to Good
Governance
EMILY CHAMLEE-WRIGHT*
ABSTRACT
Most American institutions of higher learning practice some form of shared
governance, in which individual faculty and the faculty body retain substantive
decision rights and meaningful spheres of authority. But today’s higher educa-
tion landscape presents novel challenges that are undermining the integrity of
university governance. Building upon the work of Elinor and Vincent Ostrom
and the Bloomington School of political economy, this paper interprets univer-
sity governance through the lens of the polycentric order, identifies the condi-
tions in which faculty are more likely to uphold the principles of good
governance, and the conditions under which they are more likely to become
“fair-weather friends” and violate those norms, rendering governance norms
increasingly thin and decreasingly able to withstand internal and external pres-
sures. I then discuss institutional reforms that may assist in the restoration of
norms that foster resilience.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION. .... 0.0.00. 819
Il. SHARED GOVERNANCE AS A POLYCENTRIC ORDER...........-- 820
TI. Loic OF RESILIENCE, DYNAMICS OF DECLINE............2005 824
IV. RULES-BASED REMEDIES TO NORMATIVE CHALLENGES ......... 829
V. CONCLUSION .. 0... cece teen ee 833
I. INTRODUCTION
In American higher education, shared governance, sometimes called “co-
governance” or “faculty governance,” is a well-recognized fact on the ground.
Institutional bylaws guarantee it. Through their standards and best practices,
accrediting agencies insist upon it. When the rules of shared governance are vio-
lated, faculty express indignation in the pages of higher ed trade publications.
* Emily Chamlee-Wright is the president of the Institute for Humane Studies at George Mason
University and was formerly the provost at Washington College and professor of economics and
associate dean at Beloit College. © 2024, Emily Chamlee-Wright.
819
--- Page 2 ---
820 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
In a moment when American higher education is facing unprecedented chal-
lenges, when an effective governing structure is most urgently needed, shared
governance seems to be in a tailspin. It’s not just that we are seeing conflicts
between university leaders and faculty over questions of shared governance.
Such conflicts are nothing new, nor are they necessarily signs of crisis. On the
contrary, such conflicts often signal that the rules of shared governance are doing
important work, keeping key decisions that require certain expertise and local
knowledge where they belong, in the hands of faculty.
Rather, signs of a tailspin come from the fact that in the face of new sources of
challenge—from students, state legislatures, and faculty themselves—the system
is often failing to demonstrate resilience in protecting appropriate spheres of fac-
ulty authority.
In Section II, I build upon the work of Elinor and Vincent Ostrom and their col-
leagues in the Bloomington School of political economy to interpret university
governance through the lens of the “polycentric order” and discuss the important
role that “thick” norms of good governance play in supporting such orders. In
Section III, I present a simple model that captures the logic behind traditional and
contemporary circumstances that either support or erode resilience of shared gov-
ernance. In Section IV, I discuss rules-based reforms that may strengthen local
cultures of good governance, thereby regaining legitimacy and resilience.
TI. SHARED GOVERNANCE AS A POLYCENTRIC ORDER
While familiar to most university faculty, if viewed from a distance, the ubiq-
uity of shared governance arrangements within universities might seem curious.'
Elsewhere, Paul Aligica and I argue that the principles and practices of shared
governance are indeed curious and deserve analytical attention by scholars inter-
ested in comparative governance.”
Bloomington School analysis of polycentric orders—in governance of com-
mon pool resources* and in constitutional arrangements of political life+—
provide a useful framework for understanding university governance. Unlike
top-down chain-of-command models of governance, Aligica and I argue that
university governance is a polycentric order, in which decision rights and the
associated authority that comes with those rights, are dispersed across individ-
uals and groups within the system.
1. Ina typical firm, for example, employees do not expect to govern the organizations for which they
work. University faculty, on the other hand, not only expect to play a central role, they tend to resist the
notion that they are “mere employees.”
2. Emily Chamlee-Wright & Paul Dragos Aligica, Polycentricity and the Principles of Effective
Co-Governance: What the Bloomington School Can Teach Us, in LIBERAL LEARNING & ART SELF-
GOVERNANCE 155-79 (Emily Chamlee-Wright ed., Routledge 2015).
3. See, e.g., Elinor Ostrom, GOVERNING THE COMMONS: THE EVOLUTION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR
COLLECTIVE ACTION (1990).
4. See, e.g., Vincent Ostrom, THE MEANING OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM: CONSTITUTING A SELF-
GOVERNING SOCIETY (1999).
--- Page 3 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 821
The basic rationale for shared governance is that scholars are trained in the
standards and practices of their disciplines. Therefore, decisions related to teach-
ing, research, and curriculum ought to reside with faculty. This practice aligns
with a principal feature of well-functioning polycentric orders—that decision-
making authority resides with the people who possess the relevant expertise and
local knowledge and who have a seemingly strong incentive to make good deci-
sions on behalf of the community or organization.’
An individual faculty member represents the first building block of shared gov-
ernance. Individual faculty members typically enjoy a sphere of autonomy and
authority in, for example, course design, pedagogical practice, and their agenda
for scholarly research. In Figure 1, that sphere of independence is represented by
the section of the Individual Faculty Member circle that does not intersect with
other spheres, in this case, the faculty member’s academic department.
Ficure 1. Overlapping Spheres Of Autonomy And Authority: Individual
Faculty And Academic Departments
Individual
Yet, even in a context of robust academic freedom and faculty decision rights,
there are limits to the autonomy faculty enjoy. Academic departments may, for
example, decide to adopt a common text or pedagogical practice across all sec-
tions of a given course. The area of overlap between the Faculty circle and the
Department circle illustrates this dynamic.
Similarly, as depicted in Figure 2, the decision rights exercised by academic
departments are attenuated by the authority exercised by the university’s adminis-
tration, such as additions of faculty lines and other major resource commitments.
5. On this point, see Peter J. Boettke et al., Re-Evaluating Community Policing in a Polycentric
System, 12 J. INT’L ECON., no. 2, 2016, at 305-25.
--- Page 4 ---
822 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
Boards too have spheres of autonomy. Only a board of trustees, for example, can
take on institutional debt or draw down the corpus of the university’s endowment.
And it is here that a central feature of polycentric orders begins to take shape,
namely, that power and authority are distributed across individuals and groups
within the governance process.°
Ficure 2. Overlapping Spheres of Autonomy and Authority: Faculty,
Departments, Administration, Governing Board
Figure 3, which includes faculty councils and committees, illustrates this point
and the polycentric nature of university governance more fully. Here we see the
ways in which the faculty body (as a whole) does and does not intersect with
other spheres of autonomy and authority. A curriculum committee, for example,
may constrain departments and individual faculty members when it approves
new general education requirements that call for more sections of a particular
course. Faculty committees are constrained by the administration and board if
their recommendations require budget reallocation.
6. See Vincent Ostrom, THE MEANING OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM: CONSTITUTING A SELF-GOVERNING
Soctery 237-40 (1999).
--- Page 5 ---
2024] Fair-WEATHER FRIENDS 823
Ficure 3. University Governance: A polycentric Order
Admittedly, higher education is different from many of the contexts investi-
gated by Bloomington School scholars, which include governance of natural
resources like fisheries, forests, and aquifers,’ and municipal services like local
law enforcement.*® That said, the features of good governance can nonetheless be
generalized. Good governance means that:
a. Decision rights are appropriately assigned: The people with the relevant
expertise, local knowledge, and incentive to get it right have the authority
they need to make informed recommendations and/or decisions.
b. The deliberative space is contestable: Formal rules and informal norms fos-
ter an environment in which ideas openly compete and discovery and learn-
ing emerge from the bottom-up.
c. Power is dispersed and constrained: Authority in one sphere checks the
power exercised in other spheres. Formal rules and informal norms inhibit
opportunistic behavior.
Good governance in the context of higher education means, for example, that
curricular and research decisions are largely in the hands of faculty, whereas deci-
sions related to debt restructuring are in the hands of top administrators and the
board. Further, faculty have the elbow room they need, in the lab and in the class-
room, to test new ideas and pedagogical practices. And all participants in the gov-
ernance process have mechanisms by which they can propose, discuss, and
7. Elinor Ostrom, GOVERNING THE COMMONS: THE EVOLUTION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR COLLECTIVE
ACTION (1990); See also Elinor Ostrom et al., RULES, GAMES, AND COMMON-POOL RESOURCES (2006).
8. Elinor Ostrom & Gordon Whitaker, Does Local Community Policing Make a Difference? Some
Preliminary Findings, 17 AM. J. POL. Sct. 48-76 (1973).
--- Page 6 ---
824 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
debate institutional changes, including proposals for improving the governance
process itself. Further, good governance means that formal rules and informal
norms foster respect for the decision-making authority legitimately exercised
within each sphere of the governance process.
Bloomington School scholars provide myriad case studies illustrating the bene-
fits of polycentric orders. That said, the Ostroms were the first to admit that poly-
centricity is no panacea. Polycentric systems, for example, are vulnerable to
coalitions seeking dominance and avoiding accountability.’ Further, formal rules—
those that can be proposed, tested, written down, approved, and revised—can only
do so much. Well-functioning polycentric orders tend to rely upon cultural norms
that help to ensure that participants live up to the spirit, as well as the letter of the
formal rules. And such norms are difficult to create de novo.
Thick governance cultures are those that elicit compliance with the formal
rules as a matter of default, without deliberate weighing of pros and cons. And
thick cultures are those in which participants see compliance as part of what it
means to be an upstanding member of the community. In positive-loop scenarios,
adherence to informal norms reinforces and thickens the culture of shared gover-
nance, which in turn leads to more consistent adherence, further thickening the
shared culture of good governance. It is in such scenarios that the system of
shared governance is frequently rekindled and new entrants are successfully
inducted into the culture. This shared culture acts as a bulwark against those who
might otherwise seek to subvert shared governance protocols and procedures.
Disregard for the norms, on the other hand, puts the system under greater
stress, leads to inconsistent performance, and makes the order more vulnerable to
various forms of pressure, leading to further decline in performance. If not coun-
teracted, such dynamics can render a thick culture of good governance increas-
ingly thin, accelerating a downward spiral.
These dynamics are not new. Administrators, boards, and to a lesser extent,
students have tugged and pulled against shared governance since the American
Association of University Professors issued its first statement on the matter in
1920. That said, contemporary pressures within the higher ed landscape have cre-
ated novel pressures that have a particularly corrosive effect on the norms of
good governance.
The logic of these novel challenges is presented and discussed in Section III.
Il. Loaic oF RESILIENCE, DyNAMICS OF DECLINE
To anyone who has been in higher education for a considerable length of time,
scenes like the following will sound familiar. I call these “old school’ violations
of good governance.
A board member, scandalized by the sexual nature of an assigned reading in
a course on feminist literature, insists that the faculty member be instructed
9. Vincent Ostrom, THE MEANING OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM: CONSTITUTING A SELF-GOVERNING
SoclETy 239-40 (1999).
--- Page 7 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 825
to remove the text and disciplined for assigning it in the first place.
The new president—a retired businessman unfamiliar with the univer-
sity’s governance process—attempts to change the core curriculum
requirements without consulting with the relevant faculty committees.
Students petition the Chair of the Faculty Senate, demanding that they
have voting representation on the Tenure and Promotion Committee.
In the face of such challenges, a well-functioning system of shared governance
will yield responses like the following:
No action taken against the literature professor. On the contrary, the
Faculty Council may recommend that the board member in question be
directed to the university’s policies pertaining to academic freedom. The
message: We will circle the wagons to protect the academic freedom of
our colleague.
The president will be counseled that any such change must be discussed
and approved by the Academic Policy Committee before it goes to the
Faculty Senate, where again, it will be discussed before a faculty vote is
taken. The message: It does not matter that you are the president. We
will not allow you to sidestep the shared governance process.
The chair of the Faculty Senate will write a polite letter declining consider-
ation of the students’ request, citing the professional expertise that is
required to sit on the Tenure and Promotion Committee. The message:
Students have no place in determining who earns tenure at this institution.
In short, in the face of ‘old school’ violations like these, we expect shared gov-
ernance to play its part in protecting the academic freedom of professors, keep-
ing decisions about the academic program primarily in the hands of faculty, and
upholding the gatekeeping function that faculty play in maintaining the quality
of the academic program and professoriate. And when faculty stand up for these
principles—in committee deliberations, casual conversation with colleagues, vocal
defenses on the floor of the Faculty Senate, and in landslide votes—challenges like
these may even strengthen an institution’s culture of good governance.'°
But not all governance challenges are of the old school variety. Increasingly,
for example, student activists will present an impossible-to-meet set of demands
and then deploy methods of intimidation (e.g., social media mobbing) of faculty
and administrators who do not take a public stand in favor of their demands.
Complicating these new challenges, student activists frequently enjoy support
from faculty and staff allies. In support of student activists or on their own accord,
10. Id. at 255 (“[T]he adjudication of conflicting interests, can be mobilized to use conflict in
constructive ways; they can elucidate information, clarify alternatives, and stimulate innovations in
order to find constructive resolutions and achieve a complementarity of interests ...”).
--- Page 8 ---
826 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
faculty themselves may seek to use the governance process in a manner that lim-
its the academic freedom of colleagues who pursue research, invite speakers, or
receive funding from sources that do not conform to the dominant culture.
Adding to the list of novel pressures from within, conservative state legisla-
tures—quick to call out illiberal tactics employed by the progressive left—are
themselves a source of illiberal reaction, increasingly putting pressure on public
institutions to constrain the academic freedom of faculty and departments in dis-
cussing ideas they deem to be the source of student and faculty radicalism.
In the face of such pressures, a robust system of shared governance would have
faculty defending the principles that underlie it. But as the campus wars rage on,
rarely do we hear that university governance is playing a positive role in pushing
back against illiberal forces, on the progressive left or the far right. The question
is, why? Why, when the principles of good governance are needed most urgently,
are governance systems failing to demonstrate resilience?
The crux of the answer is that contemporary challenges on campus are creat-
ing circumstances that turn principled defenders of good governance into fair-
weather friends. As their numbers increase, fair-weather friend responses, in
turn, create a Fair-Weather Friend Effect in which the norms of good governance
erode, leading to an increasingly thin governance culture that is less capable of
demonstrating credibility and resilience in the face of external pressures, like
those imposed by activist state legislatures.
Figure 4 presents the logic behind both traditional and contemporary chal-
lenges facing governance systems. The logic sequence begins with a challenge of
some kind, one that violates the rules or norms of good governance (GG). That
Ficure 4. Logic of Principled vs. Fair-Weather Friend Response
Professional/Social Rewards. 1. Principled Response
YS forDefending aa Aivectorspoit tomard 6G
Faculty Sentiments
2. Principled Response
Oppose the Challenger —_ Rominatientteme toy
Ba y > Professional/Social Costs P sentiments favoring GG outweigh the
7 for Defending GG Costsof defending ie, (0B)>¥
piseremaocn 3. Principled Response
rm: . Professional/Social Rewards ——> vumingthat thick norms and expected
” >) 15) forDefending GG petchloheanin vente ai
> Faculty Sentiments ena %
Favor the Challenger ~~ __ 4,Fair-Weather Friend Response
vy Professional/Social Costs = ——> More Likely than Scenarios 1, 2&3
for Defending GG ‘Assuming that thick norms are net strong
enough to withstand forces that pull against GG,
ie, @<(B+¥)
Professional/Social Rewards
> 5.Principled Response
v> _ forDefending GG sTgugh oonce Ne oe NESSES
Faculty Sentiments = point toward GG.
Oppose the Challenger —_
b> y Professional/Social Costs © —> 6.Falr-Weather Friend Response
y for Defending GG Assuming expected profesional costs of
sia covenmned defending Gare igh ie, > (a+ B)
Norms \ Professional/Social Rewards. —> ee pias ies Raspes Possible,
eS > for Defending GG Daten ef Goma be igh content
Faculty Sentiments “ that the rewards (y) will be realized,
Favor the Challenger -
y > Professional/Social Costs > 8.Fair-Weather Friend Response
for Defending GG ‘Assuming that thin goverance norms are
not robust enough to stand up to multiple
counter pressures ie, d'<(B++y)
--- Page 9 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 827
challenge is introduced into a local culture in which the norms of good gover-
nance are either strong and thick (@) or weak and thin (@’). Formally, the condi-
tions for thickness and thinness are a > a’ > 0, in which a thin governance
culture is still a positive force, but not as strong as a thick governance culture.
The branches of the logic tree then split with respect to whether faculty senti-
ments tend to oppose the challenger (8) or favor the challenger (B’). In chal-
lenges involving overreaching administrators or trustees, the default faculty
stance will be B. In cases where faculty sentiments align with the challenger,
such as with students, non-academic staff, and faculty advancing an agenda that
conforms to the dominant campus culture, the default posture will be B’.
The branches then split again with respect to whether faculty expect to receive
professional or social rewards (y) for defending the principles of good gover-
nance or incur professional or social costs (y’) for defending those principles.
Rewards might take the form of praise and respect from colleagues, i.e., an earned
reputation for “speaking truth to power.” Costs might include fear of retaliation
from an administrator scorned or fear of public shaming at the hands of students
or colleagues whose sentiments favor the challenger.
The various branches of the logic model suggest eight possible scenarios,
yielding (with varying degrees of likelihood) a principled response from faculty
or a fair-weather friend response, i.e., one that departs from principle when it
becomes inconvenient or costly to do so. The model presented here is descriptive.
To be predictive, we would need to know the relative magnitudes of the various
forces pulling in favor or against good governance. That said, the logic model
helps to identify distinct and realistic circumstances in our contemporary environ-
ment in which adherence to shared governance principles will be more or less
likely.
Scenario 1 is the most clear-cut of the old school variety. A heavy-handed ad-
ministrator or trustee who violates governance norms will attract little sympathy
among the faculty. Lauded is the colleague who stands up on behalf of the princi-
ples of good governance. Thick norms, faculty sentiments, and social rewards all
pull toward good governance. As such, incentives align in a way that faculty are
likely to offer a principled response to the challenge.
Scenario 2 unfolds in much the same way, but with some concern that in speak-
ing out in favor of good governance, a faculty member might face professional
repercussions (y’) from, say, the administrator or trustee issuing the challenge.
That said, the thick governance culture (a) and faculty sentiment opposing the
challenger (8) work in concert to override these fears to generate a principled
response favoring good governance, so long as (a + 8) > y’, a reasonable con-
dition in that a thick governance culture (q@) will tend to keep expectations of pro-
fessional costs (y’) relatively low.
Scenario 3 introduces a sympathetic challenger, such as student activists whose
cause aligns with dominant faculty sentiment. But the challenge is introduced
into a context of a thick governance culture (a) in which faculty expect to receive
rewards (vy) for defending the principles of good governance. This scenario
--- Page 10 ---
828 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
describes, for example, an environment in which faculty hold fast to the view that
they, not students, are the appropriate gatekeepers of decisions related to the aca-
demic program. These conditions favor a principled response, so long as the thick
governance culture and rewards for defending good governance outweigh the
pull of faculty sentiments, i.e., so long as (a+ y) > B’.
Scenario 4, on the other hand, is one in which two forces—faculty sentiment
(8’) and expectations of professional or social costs (y’)—pull against the posi-
tive force exerted by a thick governance culture (a). Such a scenario describes
contemporary challenges, when for instance, students or non-academic staff
demand changes to the curriculum based on socially progressive commitments,
faculty sentiments align with those commitments, and faculty fear that if they
defend traditional avenues for weighing competing proposals for curricular
change, they will be accused of siding with bigoted or misogynistic points of
view. If faculty sentiments and expectations of social and professional costs are
stronger than the force exerted by a thick governance culture— i.e., ifa < (B’ +
y’)faculty will become fair-weather friends of good governance. Scenarios of
this kind are especially interesting in that, if they are repeated, the Fair-Weather
Friend Effect becomes its own force, eroding a thick governance culture (@) to-
ward a thin governance culture (a’).
This is not to suggest that a principled response is impossible in a thin gover-
nance culture. On the contrary, Scenario 5, in which faculty sentiments do not
align with the challenger, faculty can still be relied upon to offer a principled
response, as all vectors point in the same direction, albeit in the context of a thin
governance culture.
Scenario 6, on the other hand, is one in which a fair-weather friend response
becomes more likely, particularly if the expectation of professional costs is
strong. Imagine, for example, a challenger who possesses administrative author-
ity and a reputation of using that authority in a heavy-handed way. Though fac-
ulty sentiments will not favor such a challenger, the thinness of norms may not
be enough to counteract the expected professional costs a good governance
champion might incur. In other words, if y’ > (a@’ + 8), faculty will become
fair-weather friends.
Scenario 6 also represents a situation in which academic administrators are
more likely to buckle under pressure exerted from above. A dean or provost who
might otherwise defend governance norms against, say, an overreaching presi-
dent will be more likely to join the ranks of fair-weather friends, as they can’t
rely on a thick governance culture as a source of faculty support. Similarly, presi-
dents facing pressure from state legislatures to, say, abridge norms of academic
freedom are more likely to cave in circumstances where the norms of good gover-
nance are thin and not consistently applied.
Because they are both contexts of thin governance norms and alignment
between challenger and faculty sentiments, Scenarios 7 and 8 represent those in
which prospective challengers may be faculty themselves. For example, an indi-
vidual or faculty group may attempt to use the governance process to abridge the
--- Page 11 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 829
academic freedom of a particular colleague who, say, advances a controversial
point of view or has invited a controversial speaker to campus.
Under such circumstances, Scenario 7 is one in which the defender of good
governance expects to be rewarded for speaking out. We might imagine, for
example, a respected member of the faculty who receives multiple confidential
appeals to speak up on behalf of academic freedom. Such a person might con-
clude that most of her colleagues really do want to defend academic freedom and
abhor the idea that the governance process would be used to undermine it, but are
simply afraid to take a public stand. Such a person might imagine that in speaking
out, she will pierce the bubble of falsified preferences and be rewarded as the per-
son who says what everyone else is thinking and turns the tide back toward a
renewed commitment to good governance.
The problem is that these conditions are highly restrictive, rendering a prin-
cipled response unlikely. Relatively few faculty will see such a scenario as their
opportunity. Many will doubt, for example, that theirs will be the respected voice
that turns the tide, and as such, they will judge the rewards (y) to be relatively
low. And if prior heroic efforts along these lines had failed, imposing costs rather
than rewards upon the good governance champion, the logic of Scenario 8 will
take hold. Would-be champions will assume that a vocal defense of good gover-
nance will bring only social and professional costs (y’). Under such circumstan-
ces the thin governance norms won’t be robust enough to counteract multiple
countervailing effects, i.c., a’ < (B’ + y’), leading to the fair-weather friend
response.
The dynamics of this logic suggest that 1) principled defenses of good gover-
nance are more likely in thick cultures of good governance, 2) good governance
is difficult to maintain when multiple pressures pull against it, and 3) fair-weather
friend responses from faculty erode thick cultures of good governance, leaving
them less resilient in the face of increasingly egregious violations.
As discussed in Section IV, once the norms of good governance have eroded,
efforts to rebuild the legitimacy and resilience of shared governance will benefit
from rules-based reform.
IV. Ruves-BAseD REMEDIES TO NORMATIVE CHALLENGES
The ethos of shared governance emerged in a context of adversarial tensions
between administrative leadership and faculty. In that environment, tacit presup-
positions emerged in which faculty believed they had something akin to a duty to
defend academic values and the principles of shared governance themselves.
Under these conditions, individual and group incentives aligned, and it was gen-
erally safe to assume that faculty councils, committees on tenure and promotion,
and other bodies viewed as the “minders” of academic integrity and faculty cul-
ture could be counted on to resist egregious violations of shared governance prin-
ciples. As such, informal norms were enough to sustain a culture of good
governance.
--- Page 12 ---
830 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
In the contemporary context, however, individual incentives pull in a direction
that test those tacit presuppositions and make it less credible to take for granted a
commitment to good governance. The contemporary environment leaves the fac-
ulty as a whole worse off, as they can no longer rely upon the generalized benefits
good governance affords. Fostering greater resilience will require a shift in condi-
tions that promote more consistent adherence to good governance principles.
How to orchestrate such a shift is the central question.
Insisting that faculty adopt sentiments different from those that they have is a
nonstarter. Abstract moral appeals favoring good governance are not likely to
have the weight necessary to counteract the pull of faculty sentiments favoring
challengers with whom they are strongly sympathetic. In other words, targeting
B’ doesn’t hold much promise. Nor can we simply insist that faculty ignore sig-
nificant professional and social costs (y’) once the fair-weather friend effect has
significantly degraded governance norms.
What’s needed is a hardened governance infrastructure that 1) imposes
appropriate constraints on the power exercised at all levels of authority and, 2)
pre-commits key players to adhere to good governance principles before the par-
ticular circumstances of a given challenge are known. What’s needed, in other
words, is a rules-based constitutional order that creates the institutional context in
which a healthy culture of good governance has an opportunity to emerge.
A “tules-based constitutional order”—language that conjures lofty notions of
American democratic institutions—may sound over-the-top. But I use this lan-
guage intentionally to draw attention to the constitutional nature of the problem
and the category of reforms best able to address it.
Governance, whether of a country or a university, is a collective activity, and all
participants have an interest in it functioning well. That said, and as the logic model
illustrates, individuals often have a private incentive to defect. To paraphrase James
Madison in Federalist 51, if angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal
controls on governance would be necessary. Madison understood that the principal
challenge is ensuring that governing authorities do not exercise their power in a
manner that undermines the rights of the governed. Democratic impulses alone are
not adequate—in fact, if left unchecked by constitutional constraints and separated
powers, such impulses can be a significant source of abuse.
The polycentric nature of university governance distributes power. And the
1967 Supreme Court ruling in Keyishian v. Board of Regents guarantees the
most basic constitutional constraint—academic freedom—for faculty holding
appointments at public institutions. But in the current climate, these checks on
power are in need of fortification.
Three relatively simple reforms, which draw from Bloomington School
insights on the relationship between formal rules and informal norms, hold partic-
ular promise: 1) Include an explicit guarantee of academic freedom in every fac-
ulty contract.'! 2) Establish a duty to protect academic freedom and a “support
11. A guarantee of academic freedom is not equivalent to permanent tenure upon hiring. Contingent and
pre-tenure members of the faculty can still be terminated for failure to meet performance expectations.
--- Page 13 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 831
and defend” commitment to shared governance (as defined in bylaws and other
relevant documents), as the primary charge of key faculty governance bodies.'”
3) Establish both responsibilities—a duty to protect academic freedom and a duty
to support and defend the principles of good governance—as primary responsibil-
ities in the contracts of chief academic officers (CAOs), with the appropriate
authority to block efforts to the contrary.
I begin with an explicit commitment to academic freedom in faculty contracts
because individual faculty are the basic building block of university governance
and their academic freedom is the central principle that defines university life.
The case in favor of this reform is most straightforward in private institutions,
which employ approximately a third of college and university professors and,
because they are not government entities, are not bound by the First Amendment,
which limits only government action. Making academic freedom an explicit con-
tractual obligation ties the hands of private university boards, administrators, and
faculty bodies that may otherwise be tempted to override it for any variety of rea-
sons. Further, it limits the damage that might be done in weak governance cul-
tures at the hands of those who seek to use the governance process to limit the
academic freedom of their colleagues.
That said, a case can be made for public institutions to adopt this practice as
well. Explicit guarantees signal the administration’s universal commitment to the
principle, not just for faculty who have earned tenure. Further, as an instrument
of governance, individual contracts sit closer to the parties involved in a conflict,
allowing for mutually agreeable resolutions and learning to emerge from the
bottom-up. Moreover, explicit guarantees to individual faculty pre-commit public
university administrations and boards to protect academic freedom in advance of
any actions by state legislatures seeking to abridge those protections.
Similarly, establishing “support and defend” commitments to academic freedom
and good governance as the primary charge of key faculty councils and committees
hardens the governance infrastructure and helps to reverse the Fair-Weather Friend
Effect that degrades the norms of good governance.
Here again, I intentionally invoke the lofty language of democratic institutions,
in this case, the constitutional oath taken by Supreme Court justices. The oath is
effective, in part because it is contractual—an explicit promise is made—to “sup-
port and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign
and domestic.” As members of the Court, justices will attend to myriad cases,
wide-ranging in their detail, but their first job is to protect the Constitution, no
matter whether the threat is an internal or external one.
12. In his contribution to this special edition, John Hasnas suggests a similar remedy in establishing
a separate authority with the explicit incentive to ensure the institution abides by the principles of
academic freedom. See John Hasnas, The Terrible Irony of Teaching Business Ethics in the Modern
University, 22 Gro. J.L. & Pus. PoL’y — (2024). I recommend assigning such responsibilities to existing
roles, such as the CAO and prominent faculty councils or committees, as these authorities already
possesses the gravitas needed to succeed in carrying out their charge.
--- Page 14 ---
832 THE GEORGETOWN JOURNAL OF LAW & PUBLIC PoLicy [Vol. 22:819
This leads to the other reason why oaths and other forms of explicit commit-
ment matter. They have ceremonial and therefore transformational power.
Though members of the Supreme Court are flesh and blood human beings, with
all the imperfections and private interests that come with the territory, when they
step into their role, they explicitly commit to rising above these interests. Their
duty is more than contractual. It’s sacred.
Establishing a “support and defend” commitment as the principal charge of
key faculty councils and committees makes clear that all other responsibilities
and concerns are subordinate to that charge. Individual faculty members may
have partisan views favoring or disfavoring certain outcomes, but in exercising
their formal responsibilities as members of a governing committee, they must set
those interests aside. Further, having such a commitment as its primary charge
means that such bodies have the responsibility to engage in something akin to ju-
dicial review, with the authority to overrule decisions made by academic depart-
ments and other faculty bodies that violate the articulated rules of university
governance.
One further benefit of this framework is that a “pre-forgiveness” norm may
emerge, in which colleagues do not impose social costs on council members who
make decisions that maintain the integrity of the governance system but go
against the grain of the local faculty culture. In other words, with the right rules
of the game, a culture may emerge that supports colleagues who serve as the
“keepers” of good governance. It may be objected that such a weighty responsi-
bility, and the possibility that a faculty member may incur social costs from hav-
ing to make an unpopular decision, may deter the faint of heart. Yet that selection
effect may prove beneficial in that such positions will attract those most firmly
committed to good governance and deter fair-weather friends and those merely
seeking power positions because they like exercising authority over others.
The third reform recommended here is to build into the contracts of CAOs a
duty to protect and defend academic freedom and the university’s governance
rules and procedures. To be effective, such responsibilities must be accompanied
by the requisite authority to block or overturn efforts by departments, faculty
councils, and committees that intentionally or unintentionally limit the academic
freedom of individual faculty members or violate the university governance rules
and procedures.'*
No doubt, this last recommendation will strike faculty as the most controver-
sial. Why, they will say, would we ever champion an expanded scope of authority
for an academic dean or provost? One answer is that such authority is highly re-
stricted, triggered only when academic departments and faculty committees have
gone awry and a “buck stops here” level of authority is required. Further, making
these expectations an explicit term of contract ties the hands of CAOs who might
seek to override these principles and stiffens the spine of those who are inclined
13. In any given institution, changes to governance rules may be necessary to accommodate these
expectations.
--- Page 15 ---
2024] Farr-WEATHER FRIENDS 833
favorably toward academic freedom and good governance, but face significant
pressure from above to do otherwise. (As discussed in Scenario 6, despite their
positions in administrative leadership, CAOs are comparatively vulnerable to such
top-down pressures.) More generally, such a reform would strengthen what is one
of the primary benefits of the polycentric order — distributed power in which each
sphere acts as a check on each of the others.
But perhaps the most persuasive reason why faculty should welcome this
reform is that it creates a productive sorting mechanism. In their next search for a
provost or dean, faculty should want to attract only those candidates who are not
deterred by such conditions. In fact, CAOs committed to academic freedom and
good governance will welcome such arrangements.
V. CONCLUSION
Understanding university governance as a polycentric order reveals the over-
lapping and distributed nature of authority, across individual faculty, faculty
councils and committees, and administrative and board leadership. Further, it
reveals the important role that thick cultural norms play in maintaining the princi-
ples of good governance. The logic model presented above identifies contempo-
rary pressures that pull against those norms, generating more fair-weather friend
responses in the face of governance challenges, which in turn generate a down-
ward spiral of increasingly thin governance norms.
The reforms presented above represent an effort to fortify the formal rules that
underlie good governance, with a particular emphasis on hardening pre-commit-
ments to the basic “constitutional principle” of academic freedom, creating more
effective checks on those who would bypass or abuse the principles of good
governance.
Such reforms are no panacea. Rather, they are a necessary step in creating the
enabling conditions in which thicker commitments to good governance might
emerge. Thicker commitments may, in turn, foster principled responses to fresh
challenges with greater frequency and consistency. Building that thicker set of
norms will require deliberate effort that goes beyond a minimal commitment to
follow the rules. Those efforts may range from informal coffee conversations
among colleagues to symposia on good governance practices. But with better
rules in place, those efforts are more likely to take root and flower.