--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 3, no 5, pp 6162-6164, May 2022
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews
Journal homepage: www.ijrpr.com ISSN 2582-7421
WWW.IJRPR.COM
Accountability in the Governance of Higher Education
Mohd Liakat,Mendhar Poonch
Department of Education Kashmir University
ABSTRACT
The paper covers the issues of accountability of higher education institutions (HEIs) in five countries: Brazil, Canada, Italy, Portugal, and Russial.
National frameworks and their implementation are examined. The special focus of the review is performance-based evaluation and funding. The reflection on
outcomes is followed by the recommendations to policy-makers, researchers and practitioners
Key words: accountability, higher education institution (HEI), new public management (NPM), performance evaluation, performance-based
funding, quality assurance.
Introduction
Accountability has been integral to higher education and other public services. The notion of accountability since its inception has evolved with
debates on trust, morality and norms. The concept of accountability underwent various stages of transformation in tandem the changing conception of
the role of the state. The decade of 1970s witnessed increasing bureaucratization and formulation of heavy administrative procedures. This shift came
along with overall decline in public trust and also increased discontent with the service provided by the public sector entities Similar, changes were
affected with regard to governance of universities. Higher educational institutions began to be viewed more as organizations rather than public
institutions with wide outreach. Besides, some key changes in environment of universities took place with respect to increase in enrolment, imposition
of state authority and increased spillover of knowledge from one discipline to another. Further, imperative of market forces became the key coordinator
for knowledge leading to the reinstatement of the role of universities. This meant reconfiguring process of governance. The rise of 'New Public
Management' (NPM) emphasized on accountability, efficiency and importance of results in the functioning of public sector. NPM focuses on input and
output control, evaluation and performance management based on efficiency and entrepreneurial leadership Likewise, the conception of accountability
transformed from ethics, morality and values laden standards to performance, output and results. This led to the rise of managerial practices towards the
functioning of universities that focused more on efficiency and output. This chapter aims to analyze the transformation with regard to academic
ft brought
about changes in the understanding of responsibility and accountability of the various actors and most importantly the teachers. Teachers became
freedom and the pursuit of knowledge that accounts quality, efficiency and effectiveness in the governance of higher education. This
accountable to the state, to the institution, to the students and other external agencies while they act to accomplish goals. Mnauel Casetlls while
describing the major functions of universities underlined that universities help in expressing the desirable ideological perspectives to improve the
societies at large. Thus, universities do the most important function i.e. generation of knowledge. However, this generation of knowledge has to be
accompanied with training towards development of skills as pointed out above, transformation in the role of the state led to alterations in the
governance structure and functions of the universities. The change in the role of state from a ‘doer’ to an ‘enabler’ (Osborne & altered the functioning of
public institutions. Studies undertaken by analyzed the changes that have taken place in the universities with respect to processes, organizational culture
and decision making. They contend that internal changes within the institution have been affected mainly due to pressure from external forces. As a
result, academic work has transformed with greater managerialism, greater instrumentalism, new forms of control and accountability. It is argued here
that changes affected should not compromise traditional values essentially upheld as good and at the same time it should cater to the empirical demands
of preservation of space for creative and academic freedom. However, space for academic freedom has been gradually eroded due to various internal
and external forces. It must be pointed out that the shift led to conceiving accountability not as an idea of normative responsibility but as measurable
answerability. Moreover, reconfiguration of internal and external authority has given rise to a new dimension with respect to the functioning of the
universities and colleges and the responsibility of teachers. Lastly, relationship between students and teachers which is based on trust has been
increasingly monitored via agencies which aim to promote procedural norms against substantive issue of competence. This chapter focuses on teacher's
perception of accountability through four important dimensions: regulation, institution, performance and market. The study examines these dimensions
through the two case universities. For this questionnaire was constructed The questionnaire was structured to understand the parameters in relation to
each of these dimensions. The various components of each of the parameters have been elaborated . On the basis of interaction with the faculty of the
two case universities, members of the executive bodies, head of the institution and members of the various teacher organization the study identified four
types of accountability i.e. regulatory accountability, institutional accountability, performance accountability and market accountability
--- Page 2 ---
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 3, no 5, pp 6162-6164, May 2022 6163
Regulatory Accountability
The conception of regulation in the governance of higher education could be located in the context of policies, guidelines and directives. The directives
are circulated by the state to the universities through the agencies for maintenance of standards. The exercise of control is carried out by regulatory
agencies or by authorities who are deemed to be the experts These regulatory bodies act as the 'level players' between the administrators, politicians and
the market. The objective of regulation is to set up standards for monitoring and to explore modifications for better enforcement. The purpose of
regulation, especially with public services such as higher education is to enforce accountability, enhancement of quality and maintenance of standards.
The regulations lay down policies and conventions for the functioning. They are also a way of exercising answerability for the various processes. UGC
is the regulatory agency for maintenance of standards across all the universities in India. Regulation is affected through various directives meant to
direct the universities towards rationality and to create a standard to procedures to control and manage the system regulations are optimistically defined
as a set of guidelines for maintenance of standards and also ensure accountability and control. The rationale behind this is to subvert procedural lapses.
Likewise, emphasis is given on norms and procedures and a code of conduct for the teachers to achieve these standards. The study argues that it is
necessary to understand, how regulations are being structured as a form of accountability. The UGC regulations as examined through the review of
literature focused largely towards building standards, monitoring activities and enforcement of accountability. The guidelines of UGC post NPE (1992)
focused on building standards for higher education. In 1998 the pay scales were revised and benchmark of minimum qualification for appointment of
faculty was underlined. The sixth pay commission 160 further enunciated the revision of pay scales as a way towards ensuring quality of education by
motivating the teachers. The UGC regulation (2010) focused on essential qualifications for teachers. The regulation gave guidelines towards
strengthening of quality of higher education. The gazette stipulated service conditions for promotion and recruitment of new faculty. The regulation
primarily focused on regulating promotion of incumbent teachers as well as the new recruitments. This was based on Academic Performance Indicator
(API). It focused on measuring teachers! performance. The UGC regulation (2013) stipulated Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers
and other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education. The gazette categorized
academic outputs and gave weightage to publications, presentations and research. All in all, these regulations indicate a shift that recognized the
importance of measuring outcomes. The interaction with the faculty of DU and AUD through questionnaire brought together their views. In examining
the views thus gathered the study took into consideration of Academic Performance Indicator (API), number of teaching hours, and number of hours in
college/school, and maintenance of attendance record as the parameters of regulation. API is the indicator which enlists criterion for promotion and
appointment of teachers in the universities. This regulation is adhered in both the universities where the focus is to meet the requirements of the enlisted
criterion. The API lays the guidelines for promotion and it is taken as a benchmark to proceed towards it. The API parameters are quantitative indices
which account the achievements of each faculty with minimal focus on quality of the academic indulgences. The API in both the case universities
shows a 100% response. As these are indicators to measure performance, they are numerically deciphered and leave less space for innovation towards
academic development. The indicators directed towards consolidation of numerical data do not offer incentives for quality. Therefore, API is a
simplistic indicator of academic performance which comprises only quantitative measurement of academic pursuits carried out by teachers and it has no
relation with how the teacher relates with the students. Further, with regard to the criteria of the number of teaching hours. It was observed that in Delhi
University teachers adhered to the norm of number of teaching hours. They believe that it is mandatory to adhere to the guidelines laid by the UGC and
the university authorities. Similarly, the number of hours in college was strictly adhered to by the teachers in accordance to the guidelines enumerated
in UGC regulation on hours of teaching. The teachers of DU opined that norms laid by the UGC cannot be altered. The rules are structured to ensure
homogenous functioning of the university owing to its large affiliating structure. These regulations are meant to enable smooth functioning of the
university and also meant to ensure larger facilities for students. Similarly, the record of attendance was to be maintained in a structured manner with
79% of the teachers perceived it is mandatory to keep and submit the record of attendance. Guidelines for benefit of attendance to students in case of
participation in extracurricular activities or consolidation of medical leave are adhered to as per the guidelines of the university. The objective as
outlined by the teachers is to help maintain standards and regularity of students. The teachers expressed apprehension with respect to disobedience to
rules or non-maintenance of record. Therefore, the regulations which are devised by the UGC as a means of preserving the standards are followed in the
traditional manner. The UGC guidelines (2010) define the number of working hours for the associate and assistant professors. A deeper understanding
of how this norm is perceived emerged while examining the distribution of workload and its relationship with the number of teaching hours. The
number of teaching hours for the associate and assistant professor prescribed as per the regulation of UGC regulation 2010 is 14 and 16 hours
respectively. In order to follow the present norm of teaching hours it often leads to split of papers amongst two sometimes even three teachers. This
distribution hampers the continuity and comprehension amongst students. The present norm of number of teaching hours has led to a compromise in the
quality of education. The amendment to UGC regulation (2013) also laid the guidelines towards interaction with the students beyond the formal
teaching learning process. The teachers are to engage with the students beyond classroom teaching with no prescribed hours. The teachers should
mentor, counsel and guide students in their endeavors. The UGC made it clear that these efforts would not be a part of API score. There was observed
lack of interest amongst DU teachers to indulge in these informal interactions as it would not be a part of their performance matrix. It was observed that
adherence to norms is largely controlled by the benefits in terms of measurable outcomes. This has a negative impact on quality of teaching or
development of academics endeavors as maintaining active relation with students has no immediate return for the teachers. Adherence to formativeness
is reflected with regard to the process of time table formation. As per the UGC guidelines (2010) the teachers are to be in college for minimum of 5
hours. The timetable for the teachers in college is formulated keeping the stipulated norms in mind. This often leads to long gaps in the timetable for
students but the norms are somehow followed to great inconvenience for the students. Interaction with the teachers of AUD demonstrated 100%
adherence to API. The regulations focusing on the minimum number of college hours and number of teaching hours are followed strictly by the
teachers. The teachers expressed that the regulations are to be followed but it should not be allowed to become a hurdle in the academic growth and
--- Page 3 ---
International Journal of Research Publication and Reviews, Vol 3, no 5, pp 6162-6164, May 2022 6164
development of knowledge. The teachers at AUD followed the regulation with respect to the number of teaching hours but at the same time were
flexible to increase the number of teaching hours, if that would contribute towards academic development and better interaction with the students. The
teachers exhibit openness towards number of teaching hours and do not limit themselves to the defined number of hours. Mentoring and counseling of
students is mandatory for teachers and it is perceived as a way to form relationship with the students for discussions and deliberations. Taking the
example of curriculum reform, examined in detail in the previous chapter the study found out that the level of participation of the teachers in DU is
more procedural than substantial. The participation of teachers in curriculum reform was observed to be limited to inputs structured around the
guidelines of UGC. The reformed curriculum gives guidelines with respect to readings and number of lectures assigned for each topic. This limits the
academic space of the teachers and their autonomy to decide on the teaching methodology and makes teaching an estranged exercise. Therefore, the
teachers perceive the regulations and guidelines as norms to be followed regardless of its down side. The process of curriculum reform in AUD is
largely initiated by the teachers. The teacher has the responsibility to structure the curriculum towards knowledge. The teachers do follow the norms
laid in the curriculum but do not limit themselves to the defined timeframe of interaction and other modalities. This exhibits flexibility and the desire
towards innovation in academic endeavors. Maintenance of attendance record is a way to ensure accountability of teachers with respect to regularity of
conduct of classes. AUD teachers perceive attendance as a means to keep a record of the regularity of students in class and also to help identify the
students with absenteeism. It is indeed described as a way to not only ensure accountability of teachers in terms of regularity and conduct of classes but
also enables teachers to identify absenteeism of students. It is well acknowledged that regulations are a way to ensure proper conduct of processes and
functions. Moreover, regulations are deemed to be a way forward to comprehend policies and their implementation. It is also a well taken point that
formal structure of authority with top down flow of communication enables academic governance. However, the understanding towards regulatory
accountability with respect to API, number of teaching hours, number of hours in college and maintenance of attendance record has brought forth some
similarities and differences. DU and AUD exhibit existence of formalism with authority. API is adhered in both the universities as it defines the
guidelines to promotion. The regulation of number of teaching hours, number of hours in college and attendance record exhibits a different perspective
as was understood through the questionnaire. In DU the number of teaching hours, number of hours in college and attendance record are focused and
executed in a normative manner. In DU the data indicates observation a top down flow of communication and exercise of authority in a prescriptive
manner. AUD exhibits an amalgamation of formalism with flexibility. The conduct of attendance record, ensuring number of teaching hours or number
of hours in college are carried out as directed by the rules but the teachers alter the methods of functioning to enable quality and knowledge
development. The alteration in processes is guided by positivism and flexibility.
REFERENCES
Adrianna &Eckel (2004) Meeting today’s Governance Challenges: A Synthesis of the Literature and Examination of a Future Agenda for Scholarship
The Journal of Higher Education 75(4) 371-399
Ahearn, E. M. (2000), Educational Accountability: a synthesis of the literature review of a balanced model of accountability, U.S. Department of
Education.
Alexander, F.(2000) 'The Changing Face of Accountability: Monitoring and Assessing Institutional Performance in Higher Education’, The Journal of
Higher Education 71(4)
Altbach, P. G. (1972). The University in Transition: An Indian Case Study, Cambridge: Mass Schenkman Altbach, P.G (1977) In Search of Saraswati:
The ambivalence of the Indianacademic, Higher Education, 6 (2) 255-275
Altbach, P.G(2011) Leadership for World- Class Universities: Challenges for Developing Countries New York, Routledge
Altbach, P.G. & Forest, J.F. (eds.) (2007). International Handbook of higher education Global Themes and Contemporary Challenges. Netherlands,
Springer
Altbach, P.G.(1975) 'Student Politics: Historical Perspective and the Changing Scene’, in Singh, A and Altbach, P. G.(eds.), The Higher Learning in
India Delhi : Vikas publisher, p 139
Altbach, P.G.(1982) Higher Education in the third world: Themes & Variations; Singapore: Mauruzen Asia.
Alters Brian and Craig E. Nelson (2002) ' Perspective: Teaching Evolution in Higher Education’, Evolution 56(10), 1891-1901