--- Page 1 ---
Guidelines for Students’ Entitlement
These guidelines have been issued by the University Grants Commission (UGC) in order to help students,
teachers, administrators and institutions understand what the minimum entitlements of the students
are. These guidelines apply to all the colleges and universities in the country (this expression includes
every institutions of higher education even if it is not called college/university) without any exception. It
shall be mandatory for every college/university to publish the present Guidelines in full in its Prospectus
and also post it on the homepage of its website.
Fulfillment of these entitlements imposes obligations on educational institutions, administrators, policy
makers, teachers and students themselves. If these obligations are not met, a student can approach the
Grievance Redressal Authority or the Ombudsman. Any serious or persistent violation of these
Guidelines can be brought to the notice of the University Grants Commission and can be the basis of
punitive action against the offender.
Some of the provisions stated here are already covered by existing laws or Rules and Regulations of the
UGC. But the students shall continue to enjoy all the right under existing laws, rules and regulations
which may not have been mentioned in these Guidelines.
1. Admission
1.1. An announcement or advertisement for any course of study must clearly specify whether the
degree granted is notified by the UGC and other relevant statutory authorities [Under Section
22 c of the UGC Act, latest list available at the UGC website] and whether the university that
awards the degree figures in the list of universities maintained by the UGC [available at the
UGC website].
1.2. A student seeking admission is entitled to a document (usually called ‘Prospectus’) that
specifies the curricula including syllabi, names and academic profile and status of the faculty,
mode and frequency of evaluation, duration of the course, academic calendar, comprehensive
information about fees or charges of any kind, and refund rules. The information given in the
prospectus should not be changed to the disadvantage of the student during the course of
study; any change if necessary must be communicated to each student individually spelling out
reasons for such a change.
1.3. The Prospectus must spell out exactly the process and criteria for admissions. This includes
weightage given to previous academic performance, entrance examination and interview. The
syllabi and format of the entrance examination must be spelt out. The final scores of each
candidate who appeared for entrance examination including all the components and the entire
waiting list must be made public.
1.4. Information about any reservations or quota for any category, the eligibility criteria for these
reservations/quotas, certificate required for seeking admission under these must be stated
clearly in the Prospectus.
1.5. The student must not be asked to produce documents which have not been mentioned in the
Prospectus. While the institution can ask the student to produce the original documents (such
as School Leaving Certificate, Marksheet, Caste certificate) for verification, they cannot retain
--- Page 2 ---
any original documents of any students. [As notified by UGC on 23" April 2007, F. No. 1-3/2007
(CPP II)]
2. Quality of teaching and learning
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.
2.5.
2.6.
2.7.
It is the responsibility of the college/university to help the students develop their learning skills
by facilitating the creation of learner centric environment conducive for quality education. The
students are entitled to receiving instruction and reading material in all the languages allowed
by the institution as medium of instruction or examination.
The students who begin with a difficulty due to social handicap or a shift in the medium of
instruction are entitled to special support to bridge the gap.
The students are entitled to availability and presence of qualified teacher, fulfillment of the
specified number of teaching days and contact hours for each course and completion of
syllabus on time. [UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualification of Teachers... 2010]
The students are entitled to reasonable access to facilities, services and resources including
library (that stocks textbooks, reference books, journals, e-resources), laboratories, and ICT
facilities in the languages permitted as medium of instruction or examination.
The student are entitled to fair, transparent and timely evaluation, including fair provisions for
timely re-checking or re-evalutation of the scripts and redressal of any grievance related to the
evaluation process. The students are entitled to a copy of their answer scripts after the
declaration of results.
The students are entitled to timely conduct of examination and declaration of results as
specified in the academic calendar in the Prospectus. They shall be entitled to the award of
degree within 180 days of the declaration of results.
The students are entitled to give regular feedback on the quality of teaching, students services
and institutional infrastructure. The college/university shall establish mechanisms for seeking
this feedback regularly and taking student feedback into account for review and improvement.
3. Fee and financial aid
3.1.
3.2.
The students are entitled to prior and full information about amount, components, frequency
and mode of any kind of payment including fees or charges of any other kind and refund rules.
If a student withdraws before the beginning of the course, the student should be refunded the
entire fee given to it with a maximum deduction of Rs. 1000. [As notified by UGC on 23 April
2007, F. No. 1-3/2007 (CPP II)]
A college/university will make utmost effort to ensure that no student is deprived of
opportunities of quality education for lack of sufficient financial resources. It is the
responsibility of the policy makers to ensure that sufficient funds are made available to
implement this principle. The Prospectus shall contain consolidated information about
scholarship/fellowship/financial aid scheme of any type that that is available to the students. It
shall bring to notice and assist the students in accessing such schemes. It shall ensure that the
procedure for selection is fair and transparent.
--- Page 3 ---
Infrastructure
4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.
The students are entitled to access to appropriate resources including classrooms, libraries,
laboratories and other academic facilities necessary for quality education. [UGC rules and
regulations for fitness of universities and colleges for Grants under section 12 B of the UGC Act
1956, Private University Regulation, Deemed University Regulation].
The students are entitled to reasonable access to sports and recreation facilities, avenues for
literary, aesthetic and other extra-curricular pursuits.
The student are entitled to reasonable attention to medical and heath requirements including
free and periodic health check-up and treatment/hospitalization in case of medical
emergencies.
The students are entitled to a reasonable access to adequate, clean and hygienic
hostel/residence accommodation that provides basic amenities including recreational facilities.
Such accommodation should be affordable and must not be utilized by the institution for profit
making. Accommodation meant for students must not be encroached upon by the institution
for any other purpose.
Student with disability are entitled to access to all schemes, facilities and services in the
university without discrimination. The college/university shall strive towards a universal design
of learning based curriculum that can address the needs of the broadest possible range of
students by minimizing barriers and maximizing learning for all students. The college/university
shall provide barrier free access, special library resources (including Braille and ICT resources],
provisions for sign language interpreter/transcriber, the required equipments and electronic
resources and the required relaxation in examination to all students with disability. [Person
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunity, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; UGC
D.O.No.F-6-1/2006(CPPII), F.No.6-1/2012(SCT)]
The students are entitled to non-discriminatory treatment (in the sense of absence of harassment,
victimization or exclusion) in every aspect of institutional functioning. Any discrimination based on
caste, gender, creed, colour, race, religion, place of birth, political conviction, language and disability
shall be prohibited.
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
In particular, institutions shall not discriminate against students belonging to Scheduled Caste
and Scheduled Tribes and racial profiling of students from any region or ethnic group. [UGC
(Promotion of Equity in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2012]
The students are entitled to protection from sexual harassment by complaining to the Gender
Sensitization Committees against Sexual Harassment. It is mandatory for each
college/university to constitute and publicize this committee as per the Guidelines and norms
laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court [Vishaka and Others Vs. State of Rajasthan and
Others(JT 1997 (7) SC 384)]
All students are entitled to protection from ragging in any form [UGC (Curbing the Menace of
Ragging) Regulation, 2009]
As democratic citizens, the students are entitled to freedom of thought and expression within and
outside their institution. The college/university must allow space for free exchange of ideas and
--- Page 4 ---
public debate so as to foster a culture of critical reasoning and questioning. College/university
authorities must not impose unreasonable, partisan or arbitrary restrictions on organizing seminars,
lecture and debates that do not otherwise violate any law.
7. The students are entitled to forming associations and unions, directly electing their representatives
to Students Unions and having their representatives on the college/university decision making
bodies including internal quality assessment, grievance committees, Gender Sensitization
Committees against Sexual Harassment and the Academic/Executive council. University/colleges
shall evolve mechanisms for adequate consultations with students’ representatives before taking
any major decision affecting the students.
8. The students are entitled to full and correct information about any institution of higher education in
which they study or propose to study. Therefore, every college/university must disclose the
following information on its website and Prospectus: status of the institution, its affiliation,
accreditation rating, physical assets and amenities, membership of governing bodies and minutes of
the meetings of bodies like Academic/Executive council, sources of income and the financial
situation and any other information about its functioning necessary for a student to make a fully
informed choice. [Section 4 (1) of Right to Information Act 2005]
9. The students are entitled to redressal of their grievance by the Grievance Redressal Committee of
the institution within 10 days of making a representation. If they are not satisfied, they are also
entitled to an appeal to the Ombudsman of the University concerned for redressal within 30 days.
[UGC (Grievance Redressal) Regulations, 2012]
10. The UGC may issue instructions for proper implementation of these Guidelines.