--- Page 1 ---
[ATT II—ave 4] AT BT UTA: TATA 11
14, =Tear
14.1 oa fafraat ® ada A Peet oft fata or aaa Ft fafa F, arte are ft we are afaa itz
aremaret erm
afoargat at fraror
15.1 feaftares agar arnt ea faaat & arateaaa Ff art arett caer & aaa Aq PT ST
afer él
wr. afry steft, afar
[fest -I11/4/2tAT./002/2023-24]
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 3rd April, 2023
University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous Status Upon Colleges and Measures for
Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges) Regulations, 2023
Preamble
F. No. 1-18/2021 (CPP-I]}—Whereas the University Grants Commission (UGC) is mandated to
coordinate and determine the standards of higher education in universities;
Whereas college autonomy is instrumental in promoting broad-based quality education and excellence;
Whereas the Commission, in exercise of its powers conferred by Section 26 of the UGC Act, 1956, has
notified the University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous Status upon Colleges and Measures for
Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges) Regulations, 2018;
And whereas there is a need to promote the autonomy of colleges so as to enhance the quality of higher
education in the country.
Now, therefore, in supersession of the University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous Status
upon Colleges and Measures for Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges) Regulations, 2018 and in
exercise of the powers conferred by clause (j) of Section 12 read with clauses (f) and (g) of sub-section (1) of
Section 26 of the University Grants Commission Act,1956, the University Grants Commission hereby makes
the following Regulations: —
1. Short title, application, and commencement: —
.1 These Regulations shall be called the University Grants Commission (Conferment of Autonomous
Status upon Colleges and Measures for Maintenance of Standards in Autonomous Colleges)
Regulations, 2023.
.2 These Regulations shall apply to all Colleges/Institutions affiliated to or are constituent colleges of
Universities in the country seeking the conferment of Autonomous College status.
.3. These Regulations shall come into force from the date of their notification in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions: -
n these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires—
2.1 “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the Autonomous College
2.2 “Act” means the University Grants Commission Act,1956
2.3. “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of a Department of the Autonomous College
2.4 “College” means any institution (affiliated College or constituent College), whether known as
such or by any other name, which provides for undergraduate and/or postgraduate and/or Ph.D.
programmes for obtaining any qualification from a university and which, in accordance with the
rules and regulations of such University, is recognized as competent to provide for such
programmes/courses of study and present students undergoing such courses of study for the
--- Page 2 ---
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III—SEc.4]
examination for the award of such qualification
2.5 “Commission” means the University Grants Commission (UGC)
2.6 “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the Autonomous College
2.7. “Governing Body” means the Governing Body of the Autonomous College, which is different
from the Trust Board or the Board of Management or the Executive Committee or the
Management Committee
2.8 “Parent Body” means the Society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860, or a body
corporate, established or incorporated under a Central or State Act for the time being in force, or
a Trust or a Company registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013; the Government or
local authority or any University (for college/institution run by them)
2.9 “Notification” means a notification issued by the parent University declaring a college as an
autonomous one after the conferment of autonomous status by the UGC
2.10 “Parent University” means the University to which the College concerned is affiliated or of
which the College concerned is a constituent
2.11 “Statutory body” means a statutory body of the Autonomous College
2.12 “Statutory Council” means a body constituted under any law for the time being in force for
determining or maintaining standards of quality in the relevant areas of higher education, such as the
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), National Medical Commission (NMC), Dental
Council of India (DCI), National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), Bar Council of India (BCI),
Indian Nursing Council (INC), or any other such body established under an Act of Parliament
2.13 Standing Committee means a Committee comprising of 3 or more Members
2.14 IQAC means Internal Quality Assurance Cell established by an Autonomous College in accordance
with the UGC Regulations made by the Commission and the guidelines on IQAC issued by the
Commission, as may be amended from time to time
3. ROLE, TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF AN AUTONOMOUS COLLEGE: - The role, terms and
conditions of an Autonomous College in general and subject to the provisions of Regulations will be as under:
3.1 Review existing courses/programmes and, restructure, redesign and prescribe its own
courses/programmes of study and syllabi.
3.2 To formulate new courses/programmes within the nomenclature specified by UGC as per the
Specification of Degrees 2014 as amended from time to time.
3.3. Evolve methods of assessment of students’ performance, conduct of examinations, and notification of
results.
3.4 To announce results, issue mark sheets, and other certificates; however, the degree shall be
awarded by the parent University with the name of the College on the degree certificate.
3.5 Autonomous colleges need not pay affiliation fees to the parent University.
3.6 Prescribe rules for admission in consonance with the reservation policy of the state
government/national policy.
3.7 Autonomous Colleges may fix fees as per the norms of the State Government/ Statutory Council(s) at
their own level, as applicable.
3.8 Constitute own Governing Body, Academic Council, Finance Committee, and Board of Studies.
3.9 The teaching staff and Principal in all the Autonomous Colleges shall be appointed as per the
University Grants Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance of Standards
in Higher Education) Regulations, 2018 as amended from time to time or any regulations notified
by UGC in this regard from time to time.
3.10 Autonomy granted to the College is at the institutional level and is not partial and shall cover the
programmes at all levels of U.G. and P.G. offered by the College. The courses introduced by the
College after the conferment of autonomous status shall automatically come under the purview of
autonomy.
3.11 Ph.D. programmes shall be offered strictly as per the UGC Regulations notified in this regard from
time to time.
--- Page 3 ---
[ATT II—ave 4] AT BT UTA: TATA 13
4.
7.
3.12 Autonomous status shall be granted initially for a period of five or ten years as per Clause 7 of
these regulations.
3.13 Further extension of autonomy shall be for a period of five or ten years as per Clause 8 of these
regulations.
ROLE OF THE PARENT UNIVERSITY: - The role of the parent University in general and subject to the
provisions of Regulations will be as under:
4.1 To examine the application of the College for autonomous status on the UGC portal and give its
recommendations, along with reasons/ justification, within 30 working days on the UGC portal. If the
parent University does not respond on the UGC portal within 30 working days, it shall be presumed that
the parent University has no objection to the processing of the application by the UGC for conferment of
autonomous status.
4.2 Issue notification within 30 days for a college to function as an autonomous entity once the
autonomous status is conferred on the College by UGC.
4.3 The College, on attaining autonomous status will continue to be affiliated with the parent
University but will enjoy the privileges of autonomy.
44 To provide nominees on various Statutory Bodies of the Autonomous College.
4.5 To facilitate the implementation of these regulations.
ROLE OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
5.1 To provide nominees on various Statutory Bodies of the Autonomous College.
5.2 The autonomous colleges shall continue to be eligible to receive funds from the State Government as
being done before the grant of autonomous status, if any.
5.3. To make efforts to fill all sanctioned faculty positions on a regular and ongoing basis.
ELIGIBILITY
6.1 Affiliated or Constituent Colleges of any discipline, whether Government, aided, partially aided,
or unaided/self-financing, are eligible, provided they are under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act.
6.2 The College should have at least 10 years of existence.
6.3. The College must be accredited either by NAAC; or by NBA for at least three programme(s); or
from a UGC-empanelled accreditation agency. However, if the number of programme(s) being run
by the College is less than three, then each of the eligible programme must be accredited as per
NBA norms. Accreditation status must be valid for at least one year at the time of application.
The constituent colleges shall also undergo independent accreditation.
6.4 The Commission may exempt a college from Clauses 6.2 and 6.3 of these Regulations, if it offers
programmes in any of the following focus areas:
e unique discipline(s), e.g., special education, Indian knowledge system, yoga, defence studies
e addressing the strategic needs of the country
e engaged in the preservation of Indian cultural heritage
e preservation of the environment
e dedicated to Skill Development, Sports, languages
e any other discipline(s)/ field(s) so determined by the Commission.
CONFERMENT OF AUTONOMOUS STATUS
7.1 A College fulfilling the eligibility as per clause 6 of these regulations, intending to become
autonomous, shall submit the application on the UGC portal anytime during the year.
However, in the case of proposals for the grant of autonomy/extension of autonomy, which have
already been received and are under consideration by UGC before the notification of these regulations, no
fresh application will be required, and UGC will consider all such pending proposals as per these
Regulations, subject to the condition that the accreditation status is valid for six months at the time of
notification of these Regulations or has applied for reaccreditation in case the validity of accreditation is
less than six months.
--- Page 4 ---
14
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III—SEc.4]
72
73
TA
75
716
77
8. EXTENSION OF AUTONOMOUS STATUS
The parent University will examine the application of the College for autonomous status on the
UGC portal and give its recommendations along with reasons/justification within 30 working days
from the date of submission of the application on the UGC portal. If the parent University does not
respond on the UGC portal within 30 working days, it shall be presumed that the parent University
has no objection to the processing of the application by the UGC for conferment of autonomous
status.
A Standing Committee of UGC shall examine the application of the College for conferment of
autonomous status. The recommendations of the Standing Committee shall be considered by the
Commission and its decision may be communicated to the parent University and the College.
Autonomous status shall be granted initially for a period of five years from the commencement of
an academic session in case the College is accredited either by NAAC; or by NBA for at least
three programme(s); or from a UGC-empanelled accreditation agency. However, if the number of
programme(s) being run by the College is less than three, then each of the eligible programme
must be accredited as per NBA norms. Accreditation status must be valid for at least one year at
the time of application submission;
Autonomous status shall be granted initially for a period of ten years from the commencement of
an academic session in case the College is accredited either by NAAC with a minimum ‘A’ Grade
(with a score of 3.01 and above on a 4-point scale of NAAC) or by NBA for at least three
programme(s) with a minimum score of 675 individually, or a corresponding accreditation
Grade/score from a UGC empanelled accreditation agency. However, if the number of
programme(s) being run by the College is less than three, then each of the eligible programme as
per NBA norms, should secure 675 or more marks. Accreditation status must be valid for at least
one year at the time of application submission;
If the application of a College for the conferment
any reason whatsoever, the College shall be eligi
year from the date of rejection of its earlier applic:
of autonomous status is rejected by the UGC for
ble to reapply on UGC portal, but not before one
ation.
An autonomous College can merge with another autonomous college(s)/institution(s) run by the same
Parent Body of the Autonomous Colleges, with the prior approval of the Parent University/Universities.
8.1 If an autonomous college has accreditation either by NAAC; or by NBA for at least three
8.2
programme(s); or from a UGC-empanelled accreditation agency; (if the number of programme(s)
being run by the College is less than three, then each of the eligible programme should be
accredited as per NBA norms) on the last day of completion of Autonomy period, the College
shall be eligible for grant of an extension of autonomous status for further five years, provided that
the College has followed the procedure stipulated in clause 8.3 below. The College shall apply for
extension of autonomous status on the UGC portal at least three months before the completion of
the autonomy period. The Autonomous College shall also inform the Parent University about its
application for the extension of autonomous status. Standing Committee of UGC shall examine
the application of the Autonomous College for extension of autonomous status. The
recommendations of the Standing Committee shall be considered by the Commission and its
decision may be communicated to the parent University and the Autonomous College.
If an autonomous college has NAAC with a minimum ‘A’ Grade with a score of 3.01 and above
on a 4-point scale of NAAC or by NBA for at least three programme(s) with a minimum score of
675 individually or a corresponding accreditation Grade/score from a UGC empanelled
accreditation agency (if the number of programme(s) being run by the College is less than three,
then each of the eligible programme as per NBA norms should secure 675 or more marks) on the
last day of completion of Autonomy period, the College shall be eligible for grant of an extension
of autonomous status for further ten years, provided that the College has followed the procedure
stipulated in clause 8.3 below. The College shall apply for extension of autonomous status on the
UGC portal at least three months before the completion of the autonomy period. The
Autonomous College shall also inform the parent University about its application for the extension
of autonomous status. Standing Committee of UGC shall examine the application of the
Autonomous College for extension of autonomous status. The recommendations of the Standing
Committee shall be considered by the Commission and its decision may be communicated to the
parent University and the Autonomous College.
8.3 Autonomous colleges are required to apply for reaccreditation six months before the end of the
cycle of accreditation period as mentioned in the Accreditation Certificate issued by National
Assessment and Accreditation Council/NBA/UGC empanelled accreditation agency. For
--- Page 5 ---
[amt Ill—ave 4] AIT BT UTI » TATA 15
10.
8.4
8.5
Autonomous Colleges which have applied for reaccreditation six months before the end of the
cycle of accreditation period, in case there is a delay in the accreditation process by the accrediting
body, the delay period between two consecutive accreditations shall be condoned. Autonomous
colleges that have not applied for reaccreditation six months before the end of the accreditation
period should get the accreditation within one year from the end of the last accreditation cycle,
failing which the autonomy automatically stands withdrawn.
In case Autonomous College fails to obtain the required accreditation Grade/score as per clauses 8.1,
8.2 and 8.3 above, the autonomy to such College stands automatically withdrawn, and no fresh
admissions will be done under autonomy mode after withdrawal of autonomous status. No
communication from the parent University and/or UGC will be needed in this regard. It will be the
responsibility of the College to inform the parent University and UGC regarding the withdrawal of
autonomy. However, for students admitted during autonomy period, such withdrawal shall take
effect only after the last batch of students enrolled under autonomy passes out.
Such Colleges whose autonomy is withdrawn shall be eligible to apply for fresh autonomy on UGC
portal, but not before one year from the effective date of withdrawal of autonomy.
MONITORING OF AUTONOMOUS COLLEGES
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
IQAC shall be established in the Autonomous College for regular monitoring of the College. The
IQAC shall have an external Peer Team comprising of 2 or more members who shall be
academicians of repute not below the rank of Professor. The report regarding the performance of
the Autonomous College shall also be put on the public domain on the website of the College. The
external peer review shall be conducted at least once in a year.
On its own or in case of an adverse report by the external peer team of IQAC or on receipt of any
information/complaint, UGC may cause an inspection by constituting an Expert Committee for
scrutiny and may revoke the autonomous status of the College after giving due opportunity of
hearing to the management by way of notification and by passing a speaking order.
The Autonomous College shall, without fail, upload on its website, information regarding the
courses offered by it, the fees for the courses, the details of the faculty along with qualification and
unique ID, the admission procedure, the details of relevant infrastructures, research activities of
the Autonomous College along with the details of Ph.D. students enrolled, if any, with the date of
enrolment, topics and supervisor.
The Autonomous College shall also put on its website the constitution of various Committees/Cells
as mandated in the various UGC Regulations notified from time to time. The Autonomous College
shall conduct the meetings of the statutory bodies regularly and upload the minutes of the meetings
on the college website.
The Autonomous College shall also upload such information on such web portals as may be specified
by the Commission, from time to time.
MATTERS REGARDING STARTING OF NEW COURSES
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
An autonomous college is free to start certificate or diploma courses without prior approval of the
parent University. The Autonomous College should inform the parent University about the
introduction of such new courses. Approval of the concerned statutory bodies of the Autonomous
College and Statutory Council(s)should be obtained, wherever required. Certificates and Diplomas
shall be issued under the seal of the Autonomous College.
An autonomous college is free to start a new degree programme(s) at undergraduate and
postgraduate levels with the approval of the Academic Council of the Autonomous College and
concerned Statutory Council(s), wherever required, provided the nomenclature of the degree is in
consonance with UGC Notification on Specification of Degrees, 2014 as amended from time to
time. Such courses shall fulfill the minimum standards prescribed by the parent
university/UGC/Statutory Council(s) in terms of number of hours, curricular content and
standards, and the parent University shall be duly informed of such courses.
An autonomous college can start Ph.D. programme with the prior approval of the parent
University. UGC Regulations for Ph.D. programmes as notified from time to time, must be
adhered to by the parent University/Autonomous College.
An autonomous college may rename an existing course as per the UGC Notification on
Specification of Degrees, 2014, as amended from time to time after restructuring/redesigning it
with the approval of the Academic Council of the Autonomous College. The parent University
--- Page 6 ---
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III—SEc.4]
should be duly informed of such proceedings. However, this renaming of course(s) will not be
applicable to previous batches.
11. EXAMINATION CELL
11.1 Autonomous College shall have an Examination Cell and should maintain all the records of the
student evaluations and examinations.
12. GOVERNANCE OF AN AUTONOMOUS COLLEGE
12.1 The autonomous College shall have the following statutory bodies to ensure proper management
of academic, financial, and general administrative affairs:
(a) Governing Body
(b) Academic Council
(c) Board of Studies
(d) Finance Committee
(The Governing Body is different from Trust Board/ Board of Management/ Executive Committee/
Management Committee).
12.2The Autonomous College shall in addition, have other non-statutory committees such as the Planning
and Evaluation Committee, Grievance Redressal Committee, Examination Committee, Admission
Committee, Library Committee, Student Welfare Committee, Internal Complaints Committee, Extra-
Curricular Activities Committee and Academic Audit Committee, etc.
12.3 GOVERNING BODY:
A. Constitution of Governing Body of Colleges run by Trust/Society
Number Category Nature
5 Members Management Nominated by the Parent Body as per its constitution or bye-laws
one of them
to be
Chairperson
2 Members Teachers of the College Nominated by the Principal based on seniority by rotation
1 Member Administrative Staff of] Administrative Officer/Senior administrative staff
the College
1 Member Educationist or] Nominated by the management
industrialist
1 Member State Government nominee] Academician not below the rank of professor or State
Government official of Directorate of Higher Education/State|
Council of Higher Education
1 Member University Nominee Nominated by the University
1 Member Principal of College Member Secretary
B. Constitution of Governing Body of Government Colleges
Number Category Nature
3. Members Educationist, Industrialist, Nominated by the State Government, persons of proven
one of them Professional academic interest with at least PG level qualification
to be
Chairperson
2 Members Teachers of the College Nominated by the Principal on seniority by rotation.
1 Member Administrative Staff of the | Administrative Officer/Senior administrative staff
College
1 Member Educationist or industrialist | Nominated by the Principal for two years
1 Member State Government nominee Nominated by the State Government
--- Page 7 ---
[ATT II—ave 4] AT BT UTA: TATA 17
1 Member University Professor Nominated by the University
1 Member Principal of College Member Secretary
Cc. Constitution of Governing Body of Constituent Colleges run by University
Number Category Nature
3 Members one_ | Educationist, Industrialist, Nominated by the University, persons of proven academic
of them to be Professional interest with at least PG level qualification
Chairperson
2 Members Teachers of the College Nominated by the Principal on seniority by rotation.
1 Member Administrative Staff of the | Administrative Officer/Senior administrative staff
College
1 Member State Government nominee | Nominated by the State Government
1 Member University Professor Nominated by the University
1 Member Principal of College Member Secretary
Term: The Governing Body shall be reconstituted every five years.
Meetings: Meetings of the Governing Body shall be held at least once every six months.
Quorum: Presence of a minimum 50% of Members will be the quorum.
Functions of the Governing Body:
Subject to the existing provision in the bye-laws of the respective Autonomous College and rules laid down by
the State Government/Parent University, the Governing Body shall:
Guide the Autonomous College while fulfilling the objectives for which the College has been
granted autonomous status.
Institute scholarships, fellowships, studentships, medals, prizes, and certificates on the
recommendations of the Academic Council
Approve new programmes of study leading to degrees and/or diplomas.
All recruitments of Teaching Faculty/Principal shall be made by the Governing Body/state
government as applicable in accordance with the policies laid down by the UGC and State
Government from time to time.
To approve the annual budget of the Autonomous College.
Perform such other functions and institute committees as may be necessary and deemed fit for
the proper development of the Autonomous College.
12.4 ACADEMIC COUNCIL:
COMPOSITION OF ACADEMIC COUNCIL:
1.
2.
3.
5.
6.
7.
The Principal (Chairman)
All the Heads of Departments in the Autonomous College
Four teachers of the Autonomous College representing different categories of teaching staff by
rotation on the basis of seniority of service in the College.
Not less than four experts/academicians from outside the Autonomous College representing
such areas as Industry, Commerce, Law, Education, Medicine, Engineering, Sciences, etc., are
to be nominated by the Governing Body.
Three nominees of the University, not less than Professors.
The Controller of Examination of the Autonomous College
A faculty member nominated by the Principal (Member Secretary).
Term: The term of the nominated members shall be three years.
Meetings: Meetings of the Academic Council shall be held at least once every six months.
Functions of the Academic Council:
--- Page 8 ---
18
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III—SEc.4]
(a)
(b)
(©)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
12.5 BOARD OF STUDIES:
To scrutinize and approve the proposals with or without modification of the Board of Studies
with regard to courses of study, academic regulations, curricula, syllabi and modifications
thereof, instructional and evaluation arrangements, methods, procedures relevant thereto, etc.,
provided that where the Academic Council differs on any proposal, it shall have the right to
return the matter for reconsideration to the Board of Studies concerned or reject it, after giving
reasons to do so.
To make regulations regarding the admission of students to different programmes of study in the
Autonomous College, keeping in view the policy of the Government.
To make regulations for sports, extra-curricular activities, and proper maintenance and
functioning of the playgrounds and hostels.
To recommend to the Governing Body proposals for the institution of new programmes of study.
To recommend to the Governing Body institution of scholarships, studentships, fellowships,
prizes, and medals, and to frame regulations for the award of the same.
To advise the Governing Body on suggestions(s) pertaining to academic affairs.
To perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Governing Body.
Composition of Board of Studies:
1.
2.
3.
Head of the Department concerned (Chairperson).
All faculty members of the Department.
Two subject experts from outside the parent University are to be nominated by the Academic
Council.
One expert is to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor from a panel of six recommended by the
Autonomous College Principal.
One representative from industry/corporate sector/allied areas to be nominated by the Principal.
One member of the College alumni to be nominated by the Principal.
Experts from outside the Autonomous College, whenever special courses of studies are to be
formulated, to be nominated by the Principal.
Term: The term of the nominated members shall be three years.
Meetings: Meetings of the Board of Studies shall be held at least once every six months.
Functions:
The Board of Studies shall recommend the following to the Academic Council:
(a) Courses of studies;
(b) Measures for the improvement of the standards of teaching and research;
(c) Any other academic matter.
12.6 FINANCE COMMITTEE:
Composition of Finance Committee:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
The Principal (Chairman).
One person to be nominated by the Governing Body of the Autonomous College for a period of
two years.
One senior-most faculty member of the Autonomous College to be nominated in rotation by the
Principal for two years.
Finance Officer/Officer in-charge of Finance and Accounts of the Autonomous College (Member
Secretary)
Term: The term of the Finance Committee shall be three years.
Meetings: Meetings of the Finance Committee shall be held at least once every six months.
--- Page 9 ---
[ATT II—ave 4] AT BT UTA: TATA 19
Functions of the Finance Committee:
The Finance Committee shall act as an advisory body to the Governing Body to consider:
(a) Budget estimates relating to the grant received/receivable from funding agencies, income from
fees, etc. and
(b) Audited accounts for the above.
13. CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS
13.1 The Autonomous Colleges shall at all times adhere to UGC Regulations and Guidelines made and issued
by the Commission from time to time, failing which UGC may take appropriate action against the
defaulting Autonomous College including revoking of autonomous status.
14. INTERPRETATION
14.1 In the event of any conflict or inconsistency with respect to these regulations, the interpretation given by
the Commission shall be final and binding.
15. REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES
15.1 The Commission reserves the right to remove difficulty/difficulties in the course of implementation of
these Regulations.
Prof. MANISH JOSHI, Secy.
[ADVT.-III/4/Exty./002/2023-24]
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-1 10064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. says"