--- Page 1 ---
ie wer TELANGANA cyan 287358
iat LICENSED STAMP VENDOR
a REDDY Lic. No, 23/00/006/2023
SeRAIA REDDY MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION 3%20220
a VILLAGE, RAJAPETA
TEIA EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY GEETHANJALI .  Sananoceterer
! Ph 9052781235
(DEEMED - TO - BE ~ UNIVERSITY)
— This Memorandum of Association, as per UGC (Institutions deemed to be universities)
regulations, 2023 executed at Hyderabad this _ OF" Day of Spt Satie tr
f I, Mr.G. R. Ravinder Reddy, Aadhar No, 8371 4429 6636 Chairman! Secretary, Teja
{Educational Society, son of | Sri. G. Raja Reddy, aged 61 years and, resident of Orion
Villas, Villa-46, NSL Divyasree Orions, 66/1, Beside Raidurgam Police Station,
! Hyderabad - 500 032 by Managing society witnesses as follows:
i 1.0. Name, Address and Registration details of the society:
' i. Teja Educational Society, Sy. No. 33& 34, Cheeryal (Village), Keesara (M).
Medchal Dist., Telangana -501301
1 The society registration Document No.1174 of 2002 dated 9" September, 2002 as per office
Hi of the registrar of societies Hyderabad as per the registration act 2001
ii, Name of the institution (Deemed to be University):
i The Name of the institution shall be Geethanjali (Deemed to be University)
\ a
br Teja Ecucational Society
ATTEST eninge en Uw
YATA BHASKAR, 8con, m4 uL8  Boeraany
ADVOCATE & NOTARY 4
by Govt. of India
Appointed
Regd. No. 2536/2022, Expiry Dt: 16-08-2027
oa oe
--- Page 2 ---
tire seo: 5 3eke
G3 tedjatite
ee au atm. t RAN@AHA AT"
MATOS RTADD.
bn! Ya tyne: nt *
Tan SOs Al eign? _ ey ve?
Manage wee Or Dee Om 4
FP" Z.FPI mee my
--- Page 3 ---
iii.
2.0.
()
(2)
G)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
qt)
Isncite sun ciel AT
Approved constituent units /Off-campuses / Off-shore Campuses
with UGC letter / MHRD notification dates:
At present there are constituent units running under this society.
Definitions —
In these Memorandum of Association and Rules of the Deemed to be University, unless the
context otherwise requires-
“Academic Council” means the academic council of the Institution Deemed to be
University
“Act” means the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956).
“Affiliated College” means a college recognized by, associated with and
admitted to the privileges of a University:
“Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of a Department of the Institution
Deemed to be University;
“Campus” means campus (single or multiple locations within the city) of the
Institution Deemed to be University where in its facilities, faculty, staff, students,
and Academic Departments are situated:
“Centre” means a center of studies of the Institution Deemed to be University:
“Chancellor”, “Vice-Chancellor”, and “Pro-Vice-Chancellor” means, the
Chancellor, Vice- Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the Institution Deemed
to be University, respectively:
“College” means any Institution whether affiliated college or constituent college,
known as such or by any other name and provides undergraduate or postgraduate
or Ph.D. programmes or all together. for obtaining any qualification from a
University, in accordance with the rules and regulations of such University,
which has been recognised as competent by the University Grants Commission to
provide such programmes or courses of study;
“Commission” means the University Grants Commission (UGC) constituted
under the Act:
“Constituent college” means a college operating under the administrative.
academic, and financial control of the sponsoring body;
“Constituent Unit" means an academic unit (Schools or centers or departments)
at Tejs Educational Society
STED Page2onasyT2arrA RAs
TEJA EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
YATA BHASKAR, s. MGs56 AANSS
--- Page 4 ---
of the Institution existing on the date of submission of proposal to be declared as
an Institution Deemed to be University:
(12) “Deparment” means a department of studies of the Institution Deemed to be
University:
(13) “Distinct Category” means an existing Institution or an Institution starting from
the beginning with the focus on teaching or research in the unique disciplines or
addressing the strategic needs of the country or engaged in the preservation of
Indian cultural heritage or preservation of the environment or dedicated to skill
development or dedicated to sports or languages or any other discipline, as so
determined by the Expert Committee approved by the Chairman of the
Commission:
(14) “Executive Council” means the executive council of the Institution Deemed to be
University:
(15) “Expert Committee" means a Committee consisting of academics and other
experts from other fields and includes representatives of the statutory bodies and
approved by the Chairman of the Commission;
(16) “Government” means the Department in the Ministry of Education in the Central
Government dealing with the higher education;
(17) “Institution” means an Institution of higher education engaged in teaching and
research at the undergraduate, post-graduate or higher level;
(18) “Institution Deemed to be University” means an Institution of higher education
so declared by the Central Government by notification under section 3 of the Act,
on the advice of the Commission;
(19) “Main campus” means the campus of the Institution Deemed to be University,
where its major facilities, faculty, staff, students, academic departments and
administration are situated,
(20) MoA / Rules means Memorandum of Association and /or Rules of
GEETHANJALI (DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITY).
(21) “NAAC™ means the National Assessment and Accreditation Council;
(22) "NBA" means the National Board of Accreditation;
(23) “Necessary infrastructure” means the infrastructure required under the norms of
the concerned statutory body or the Commission, as the case may be:
(24) “NEP” means the National Education Policy, 2020;
2 lanoite a ist \ ‘
peas eee ca 3 Q5Tesii Teja Educational Society
YATA BHAS TEJA EDUCATIONAL SO0E eae ’
+ Rcameawiaar YRATOM 2 ATA Secrets Y
Appointed by Govt. of India hr! to .1v0 ’
— 022, Expy Ce 10 yaar
4. SSA tide (of
VEECARA rary DIST-500 089) O02 Tel MM
--- Page 5 ---
(25) NIRF" means the National Institutional Ranking Framework;
(26) Notification” means a notification issued by the Central Government in the
Official Gazette declaring an institution of higher education, as an Institution
Deemed to be University under section 3 of the Act:
(27) Off-Campus" means the premises of the Institution Deemed to be University.
approved by the Government, other than the main campus or the Campuses:
(28) “Off-shore campus" means the premises of the Institution Deemed to be
University,
(29) Processing fee" means the fee to be paid by the applicant Institution to the
Commission along with the application for processing such application:
(30) Regulations” means the University Grants Commission (Institutions Deemed to
be Universities) Regulations, 2023;
(31) School” or “Faculty” means a school or Faculty of studies of the Institution
Deemed to be University:
(32) Sponsoring body” means a body being a charitable or a not-for-profit society or
trust or a company under section 8 of the Companies Act. 2013 (18 of 2013),
submitting an application for declaring an Institution under its administrative,
academic and financial control as an Institution Deemed to be University:
(33) “Standing Committee" means a committee consisting of academics and other
experts from other fields and includes representatives of the statutory bodies and
approved by the Chairman of the Commission;
(34) “Statutory body” means a body constituted under any law for the time being in
force for determining or maintaining standards of quality in the relevant areas of
higher education, including the All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE), the Bar Council of India (BCI), the Dental Council of India (DCI), the
Indian Nursing Council (INC), the National Council for Teacher Education
(NCTE) and the National Medical Commission (NMC). or any other statutory
body established under an Act of Parliament:
(35) Teacher” means professors, associate professors, assistant professors and such
other academic staff as may be appointed for imparting instructions or
conducting research in the Institution Deemed to be University including the
adjunct faculty or professor of practice or visiting faculty; and
(36) The words and expressions used in these regulations and not defined. but defined
| ra Teja Educational Societ,
fenoitesu03 wares pases ot Ps ¢ ATTA 2 jp
c TY
fe / \G TEJA EDUCATIO! .
4 ogee , YATA BHASKAR, BCom, MA LLB a oats A TAS Gauny
*\ 220362022 8] Appointed by oe aces aie 2
Fi No. 22536/2022, 8
eS he. 12-29/68)/11, Raj Sukh Nagae Nagatam,
verrens 14),'M.M, DIST-500°083."”
--- Page 6 ---
in the Act shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them
3.0. Objectives of an Institution Deemed to be University —
The objectives of the Institution Deemed to be University shall be to
{a) Provide for higher education leading to excellence and innovations in such
branches of knowledge as may be deemed fit. primarily at undergraduate, post-
graduate, and research degree levels. fully conforming to the concept of a
University;
(b) Engage in inter-disciplinary or multi-disciplinary or trans-disciplinary teaching
=
and research in addition to domain-specific specialization:
(c) Provide for high-quality teaching and research recognised nationally and globally:
(d) Recognise, identify and foster the unique capabilities of each student, by
=
sensitising teachers as well as parents to promote cach student's holistic
development;
(e) Provide multi-disciplinarity and a holistic education in the faculties of science,
engineering, technology, social sciences, arts, humanities, sports and other
disciplines;
(tf) Transform into research and teaching intensive University over a period of time;
(g) Focus on research and innovation by setting up start-up incubation centers:
technology development centres: centres in frontier areas of research; greater
industry-academic linkages; and inter-disciplinary research including humanities
and social sciences research;
(h) Provide flexible and innovative curriculum, which includes credit-based courses
and projects in the areas of community engagement and service. environmental
education, value-based education, ete:
(i) Contribute for social transformation through socially responsive teaching.
learning, research, and fieldwork:
(j) Adopt the provisions of NEP, 2020; and
(k
—
Strengthen the research ecosystem by establishing Research and Development
Cell (RDC).
(1) Possess such academic and physical infrastructure as may be specified by the
Commission or the relevant statutory body, as the case may be:
ge sot 3 OTTRATTA al ~
artesregf 0: A seiindien
YATA BHASKAR, 8m, Midaarone sts Secretary
“gy oe ;
2egd. No. 22 , 16-08-2027
SeTeAOA (MN MM DIST.SAN 183,
--- Page 7 ---
(m) Have teacher-student ratio of 1:20 with a minimum combined faculty strength of
not less than one hundred and fifty teachers and a minimum combined student
strength of three thousand on rolls under the regular classroom mode, of which
not less than one fifth being post-graduate or research or as per the norms of the
relevant statutory body; and
(n) Shall have an administrative area, library, lecture halls, labs, hostels, health care,
common facilities, and recreational facilities,
4.0 Corpus Fund —
1, A Corpus fund of rupees twenty- five crores or as decided by the Commission from
time to time, shall be created and maintained in the name of the Institution Deemed to
be University:
2. The interest accrued on the Corpus Fund shall be used only for the purpose of further
development of the Institution Deemed to be University; and
3, Institutions Deemed to be Universities may invest the corpus fund in any suitable scheme or
schemes,
5.0 Off-campus centers —
(1) (i) Institutions Deemed to be Universities with minimum *A* grade and above or
ranked from | to 100 in the "Universities" category of NIRF ranking of the relevant
~
year are eligible to set up off-campus centers.
(ii) Institutions declared as Deemed to be Universities under *Distinct Category” may
apply for off-campuses after five years of their declaration. if they fulfil the criteria
specified in clause (i).
(2) The Institution Deemed to be Universities shall have the infrastructure at the proposed
Off- campus centres in accordance with the norms and standards specified by the
relevant statutory body or the Commission, as the case may be, and the Institute shall
start the off-campus centre with a minimum of five under graduate or post graduate or
research or combination thereof with a minimum of one thousand students, of which
not less than one-fifth of the students shall be post-graduate or research students with
fifty teachers and with required infrastructure facilities.
(3) The Government may withdraw the approval granted for starting the off-campus
centre if at any time, it is found that the information provided by the Institution
fh 4 Toje Eoucational Society
imoubTee? ATTESTED Pcs ot x3 TESTIA Dw
TEJA EDUCAT sOc ;
YATA BHASKAR, sco nit | ST8) Soy
Appointed by ocan of India ;
Regd. No, 22536/2022, Expiry Dt: 16-08-2027
H. No. 12-29/68/1 Sukh Nagar, Nagaram,
KFECARA 0, me DIST-S00 083.
--- Page 8 ---
Deemed to be University is incorrect and in order to protect the interests of students
enrolled at such centre, the Institution Deemed to be University shall take necessary
action for shifting of such students to the main campus.
=
(4) The Institution Deemed to be University shall start new courses or programmes in any
field in their existing campus and approved off-campus centres only with the prior
approval of its Executive Council and also, wherever applicable, with the approval of
the relevant statutory bodies:
6.0 Off-shore campus —
(l
~
Institutions Deemed to be Universities may start or establish off-shore campuses with
the prior approval of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the
Act. rules and regulations made thereunder.
(2) Existing off-shore campuses shall continue to operate, provided they have obtained
proper permissions and approval,
7.0 Monitoring —
(1) The Commission shall monitor the performance and academic outcomes of the
Institutions Deemed to be Universities,
(2) The Commission shall decide on the physical verification of an Institution Deemed to
be University. or constitute teams for such verification on its own or upon receipt of
any complaints against the accuracy and veracity of the information submitted to the
commission and also hosted on the website of the Institution.
8.0 Governance — 5
(1) The Institution Deemed to be University shall be registered as a not-for-profit Society
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or as a not-for-profit trust
under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or as a not-for-profit company registered
under section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013(18 of 2013):
PROVIDED that a sponsoring body exclusively established for running educational
Institutions shall be exempted from registering as a separate not-for-profit society or
trust or a company and the sponsoring body shall specifically mention in its
registration deed that the sponsoring body is exclusively for running educational
2u03 sist (i1_4 ,
> ATTESTED Page 7 Of} } CALI A Tap saegeioeteesiow
NOTARY jr AL SOCIETY By
> onweo|e) YATA BHASKAR, = ANE! ae
22bs202< / * hg “Secreta
; Appointed by Govt. of India
- vA Reqd No. 22536/2022, Expiry Ot 16 2027 “
i er oy) DIST-SOONRI.! EH He
Secretary
--- Page 9 ---
activities and no other activities are being carried out or shall be carried out in the
future under it:
PROVIDED further that if the sponsoring body of an existing Institution Deemed to
be University does not have a Society or trust or company exclusively for running
educational Institutions, it shall form a new not-for-profit Society or trust or Company
for the purposes of Institution Deemed to be University and in such cases, the
sponsoring body shall be exempted from transferring its moveable and immoveable
assets to the newly created Society or trust or company, if such sponsoring body
provides a notarised affidavit to the effect that the entire moveable and immoveable
assets allocated to the Institution Deemed to be University shall not be leased or
otherwise disposed of without the prior permission of the Commission.
PROVIDED also that the sponsoring body shall make available the necessary
infrastructure for operating the Institution Deemed to be University without any rental
or other such charges.
(2) All moveable and immoveable assets of the Institution Deemed to be University shall
be used only for the purpose of conducting academic activities, promotion of research
and related administrative requirements of the Institution Deemed to be University,
including the outreach educational activities.
(3) The highest governing body of the Institution Deemed to be University shall be the
Executive Council to be headed by the Vice-Chancellor and consisting of not less
than ten and not more than thirteen members.
(4) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the Institution
Deemed to be University.
(5) The composition of Executive Council shall be as under-
a) Vice-Chancellor — Chairperson;
b) Pro Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable);
¢) Two members from amongst the Deans of Schools of studies, by rotation, to be
appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;
d) One Professor, who is not a Dean, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor:
e) One Associate Professor. by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor:
f) One Assistant Professor, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;
2) One representative shall be nominated by the commission:
h) Upto four nominees of the Sponsoring body, and
i) The Registrar, who shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Executive Council.
tanoire 2103 sist ve arte TED. aTeatta -” yt
YAT, BHA Page 8 of 3
AOVOCRTE A RIMM NOBEL SOC 0 1 9 ATA’ Sin
,_, Appointed by Govt. of India YRATOM A 3TA
‘end. No. 22536/2022, Expry Dt: 16-08-2027") 0 =
4. No. 12-29/68/11, Raj Sukh Nagas, ai 40 yaks
KEESARA (M), M.M, (DIST360 bee
--- Page 10 ---
9.0 Tenure of the members of the Executive Council —
(1) All the members of the Executive Council, other than the Vice-Chancellor and Pro-
Vice-Chancellor, shall hold office for a term of three years and in the case of Deans,
the term shall be for three years or until they hold the office of Dean, whichever is
earlier.
(2) Members of the Executive Council appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from Professor.
Associate Professor and Assistant Professor category shall hold office for a period of
one year or till such time they cease to be teachers of the University, whichever is
earlier.
10.0 Powers and Limitations of the Executive Council —
(1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of
the Institution Deemed to be University.
(2) The Executive Council shall be the final decision-making body of the Institution
Deemed to be University in respect of every matter of the Institution Deemed to
be University. including academic, administrative, personnel, financial, and
developmental matters.
(3) — Subject to the provisions of these regulations and rules of the Institution Deemed
to be University. the Executive Council shall, in addition to all other powers
vested in it, have the following powers, namely:
a) To appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other
academic staff, including Chairs, as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the
Selection Committee constituted for the said purpose and to fill up temporary
vacancies therein;
b
To regulate and enforce discipline amongst the employees of the institution in
accordance with the rules of the Institution Deemed to be University;
c) To provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Professor
of Practice. Consultants, Scholars, etc., and determine the terms and conditions of
such appointments:
d
To exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or
imposed on it by the rules and regulations of the Institution Deemed to be University;
¢) To make rules and regulations for the Institution Deemed to be University; and
ia nsd3 aieT R14 Gz12a11A
ATTESTED Page 9 of =. MOAI q Teja Eaucational Society
Appointed by Govt. of Indian. «> ‘ y
/ Regd. No. 22536/2022, Expiry Dt: 16-08-2027" »«
gif H. No. 12-29/68/ Nagar, Nagaram, O° * 1210
ld ereenea yon 'e ee reTeeno tae
--- Page 11 ---
11.0 Meetings of the Executive Council —
(1) The Executive Council shall meet at least four times a year (minimum two in one
semester), with not less than seven days’ prior notice given before every meeting of
the Executive Council and emergency meetings may be convened at short notice, for
reasons to be recorded in writing for such emergency meeting.
(2) One-third of the total number of members of Executive Council shall form the
quorum for a meeting,
(3) In the absence of the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice Chancellor shall preside over the
meeting; and where there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor in an Institution Deemed to be
University. a member chosen by the other members of the Executive Council present
at the meeting. shall preside over the meeting.
(4) Every member of the Executive Council, including the Chairperson, shall have one
vote and decisions at the meetings of the Executive Council shall be taken by simple
majority; and in case of a tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote.
(5) Any business, which may be urgent in nature, may be carried out by circulation
amongst its members.
(6) A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be furnished to the Chancellor of the
Institution Deemed to be University as soon as possible after the convening of the
meeting.
12.0 Termination of Membership —
If a member other than the Vice- Chancellor, and those representing the teachers,
accepts a full-time appointment in the Institution Deemed to be University or fails to
attend three consecutive meetings of the Executive Council, without proper leave of
absence, such member shall cease to be a member of the Executive Council.
13.0 Delegation of Powers of the Executive Council —
The Executive Council may. by a resolution, delegate to the Vice Chancellor or any
other officer or faculty or to a Committee of officers or faculties of the Institution
Deemed to be University, such powers as it may deem fit, subject to the condition that
the action taken by the Vice Chancellor or the officer or faculty, or the Committee in
gecesi STED Page one dea TTA (2
YATA BHASKAR? acy 94 atsoclety =
YRATOM 2 ATADt
--- Page 12 ---
the exercise of the powers so delegated, shall be reported at the next meeting of the
Executive Council.
14.0 Other Authorities of Institution Deemed to be University —
A. Academic Council:
{t) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the Institution
Deemed to be University and shall. subject to the provision of the rules of the
Institution Deemed to be University, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision
over the academic policy of the Institution Deemed to be University.
(2) The composition of the Academic Council shall be as under -
{i) Vice Chancellor - Chairperson;
(ii) Pro Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable);
(iii) Deans of faculties of the Schools and Heads of the Departments or Centres:
(iv) Up to ten Professors (excluding those who are Deans of schools and heads of
Departments or Centres) by rotation, to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor giving
due regard to the representation of different Schools or Departments or Centres:
(v) Up to five Associate Professors from Departments or Centres other than the heads of
the Departments or Centres, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;
(vi) Up to five Assistant Professors from the Departments or Centres other than the
Heads of the Departments or Centres, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor:
(vii) Six persons of repute from amongst the educationists or experts for their specialized
know ledge. who are not in the service of the Institution Deemed to be University,
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; and
(viii) The Registrar. who shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Academic Council,
(3) The representation of different categories shall be through rotation and not through
an election and the term of members. other than the ex-officio members, shall be three
years and the Controller of Examination shall be the permanent invitee to the
meetings of the Academic Council,
B. Powers and Functions of the Academic Council:
Subject to the provisions of these regulations and rules of the Institution Deemed to be
University, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the
following powers, namely: -
lencitenun aja ut
a EyAR bo. L
L 2471 “Teja Educational Society
ATTESTED"! Sa
CATIONAL vies 1c
YATA BHASKAR, Ron, 8 Ne 00 +
7 9 Appointed by Govt. ot Tees»
5d eee ee 1
--- Page 13 ---
(a) To exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the Institution Deemed
to be University and to give direction regarding methods of instruction, co-ordination
of teaching among departments or faculties or Schools or centers, evaluation of
research and improvement of academic standards;
(b) To bring about and promote inter-departmental, inter-faculty, inter-school, inter-
center co-ordination and to establish or appoint such committees or boards, as may be
deemed necessary for the purpose:
(c) To consider matters of general academic interest cither on its own initiative. or on a
reference by a department or faculty or school or centre or the Executive Council, and
to take appropriate action thereon;
(d) To prescribe courses or programmes of study leading to degree and diploma of the
Institution Deemed to be University;
(ec) To make arrangements for the conduct of examinations in conformity with the rules
and bye-laws; of the institution Deemed to be University:
(f) To maintain proper standards of the examination:
(g) To recognise diplomas and degrees of Universities and other Institutions and to
determine equivalence with the diplomas and degrees of the Institution Deemed to be
University:
(h) To institute Fellowships, Scholarships, Medals, Prizes etc.:
(i) To frame rules covering the academic functioning of the Institution Deemed to be
University, admissions, examinations, award of fellowships and studentships. free-
ships. concessions. attendance. discipline, residence. ete:
(j) To take a periodical review of the activities of the departments or centres and to take
appropriate action to maintain and improve the standards of instruction:
(k) To recommend the institution of teaching posts (Professors, Associate Professors, and
Assistant Professors) to the Executive Council:
(1) To make recommendations to the Executive Council for the establishment or abolition
of departments or centres or schools or faculties, etc:
(m) To make recommendations to the Executive council. and
(n) To exercise such other powers, and to perform such other duties, as may be conferred
or imposed upon it by the rules of the Institution Deemed to be University.
\n__- Teja Eaucational Socieiy
Se VANS
ATATBHASKAR, acon? dep! BATZAITTA Secretary
Appointed by Gove. of tata See AHA ATA
2022, Expy Dt: 16-08-2027 YAATOM & FTAIO
--- Page 14 ---
C. Meeting of the Academic Council —
(1) The Academic Council shall meet as often as necessary but not less than four times
(at least two times in a semester) during an academic year with not less than seven
days prior notice being given before every meeting of the Academic Council and
emergency meetings may be convened at a shorter notice. for reasons to be recorded
in writing for such emergency meeting.
(2) One-third of the total number of members of the Academic Council shall constitute
the quorum for the meeting of the Academic Council.
G3) Each member. including its Chairperson, shall have one vote, and decisions at the
meetings of the Academic Council shall be taken by simple majority; and in case of a
tie. the Chairperson shall have a casting vote.
(4) Any business that may be necessary for the Academic Council to perform, which may
be urgent in nature, may be carried out by circulation amongst its members.
15.0 Finance Committee —
(1) The composition of the Finance Committee shall be as under-
(i) Vice Chancellor - Chairperson:
(ii) Pro Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable):
(iii) One person nominated by the society or trust or company. as the case may be
(wherever applicable}:
(iv) Three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one
shall be a member of the Executive Council;
(v) One representative shall be nominated by the Commission;
(vi) Three persons to be nominated by the Chancellor;
(vii) Finance Officer-Secretary - ex officio
(2) All members of the Finance Committee other than ex-officio member shall hold office
for a term of three years.
(3) The Finance Committee shall meet at least four times in an academic year (at least
twice cach semester) to examine the accounts and scrutinise the proposals for
expenditure and one-third of the total number of members of the Finance Committee
shall form the quorum for a meeting.
(4) All 4 Proposals relating to the creation of posts, and those items which have not been
«30? lent
included in the SY shall be examined by the Finance Committee before the
Usic
i Rege ldokase AANA an ae
YATA BHASKAR, scm, AU
ADVOCATE & NOTARY SS05-80-8! 590 yuiax ae
Appointed pe Ere teal
No, 22536/2022, Expiry Dt: 1 o02-Teld hh
H. No. 12-29/68/11, Raj Such Nagar, Nagarem,
VEEEADA (M), MM, DIST-S00 083.
--- Page 15 ---
Executive Council considers them and to decide waiver in fees, the establishment of
scholarships, freeship and any other financial benefits.
(5) The annual accounts and financial estimates of the Institution Deemed to be
University prepared by the Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance
Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter the same shall be
submitted to the Executive Council for approval.
(6) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring and non-
recurring expenditures for the year, based on the income and resources of the
Institution Deemed to be University.
16.0 Board of Studies —
(1) There shall be one Board of Studies for each Department or School of the Institution
Deemed to be University. The composition of the Board of Studies shall be as under-
(i) Dean of school or Head of the Department - Chairperson:
(ii) All Professors of the School or Department;
(iii)Two Associate Professors of the school or department by rotation;
(iv) Two Assistant Professors of the school or department by rotation; and
(v) Two external experts to be co-opted for their specialized knowledge.
(2) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions
of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and
other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School
Board in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the Institution Deemed to
be University regarding-
(a) Courses of studies:
(b) Appointment of supervisors for research; and
(c) Measures for the improvement of the standards of teaching and research,
(3) The powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be prescribed by the rules of
the Institution Deemed to be University.
17.0 Selection Committee for appointment of teaching staff —
There shall be one or more Selection Committees constituted. for making
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the post of Professors,
Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and such other posts as may be prescribed,
os invaceordanc@ With the Liniversity Grants Commission (Minimum Qualifications for
ATTESTEDrccisorsA3Te3TTA — Teja Eawcauonal Socuy
ee MATA BHASKAR neck acne eA ATAY (2MUI
ADR OCATE & NOTARY po yadyree OV 7 Seciet
Regd. No. 22536/2092 Expiry be 6-80-81 10 yiqed At
H. No, 12- 11, Dt: pak a2 ft
--- Page 16 ---
18.0
(t)
19.0
(y
(3)
Appointment of Teachers and other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and
other Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education), Regulations,
2018,
Disqualification —
A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being. a member of any of
the authorities, or being appointed as, and for being. an officer. of the Institution
Deemed to be University if-
(a) If he or she is of unsound mind; or
(b) If he or she is an un-discharged insolvent; or
(c) If he or she has been convicted by a court of law for an offence involving more
turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six
months; or
(d) If he or she has not been appointed as per the provisions of these regulations.
If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the
disqualifications mentioned above, the question shall be referred to the Chancellor,
and his or her decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any
civil court against such decision.
Miscellaneous matters relating to different authorities —
If any question arises, as to whether any person, other than Government nominated or
appointed, has been duly nominated or appointed as, or is, entitled to be a member of
any authority or any committee of the Institution Deemed to be University, the matter
shall be referred to the Chancellor, whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
Any member. other than an ex-officio member of any authority, may resign by a letter
addressed to the Registrar, and the resignation shall take effect as soon as it is
accepted by the Chancellor or the Chairperson of the Executive Council. as the case
may be.
Sudden vacancies among the members of any authority or any Committee of the
Institution Deemed to be University shall be filled by the respective authority, as soon
as may be, and within a period of six months.
(y L_~ 4 Teja buuceuorid! oueins,
04 siel ATTESTED Page 150f3H 1c 4) |
YATA BHASKAR, ‘iin, 19 SOGETY 5 iH °” ‘gecretary
Appointed by Govt. of India YHAT oe
H. Teall eee Bt 7 q
KFESARA (M), M.M. DIST-500 an yeget Mv ag
) OO?
in
--- Page 17 ---
20.0 Officers of the Institution Deemed to be University --
A. Chancellor:
|. The Chancellor, shall hold office for a period of 5 years from the date of assuming
office, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by following the
procedure prescribed for the appointment of the Chancellor:
PROVIDED that the Chancellor in the Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall be
appointed by the sponsoring body.
2. The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his or her office. be the head of the Institution Deemed to
be University and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the Institution Deemed to
be University held for conferring degrees.
B. Vice-Chancellor:
(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the Institution Deemed
to be University, and shall be appointed by the Chancellor from a panel of three
names suggested by a Search-cum- Selection Committee.
(2) The qualifications of the Vice-Chancellor shall be in accordance with the University
Grants Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance
of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations, 2018,
(3) The procedure for composition of Search-cum-Selection-Committee (SCSC) for the
selection of Vice- Chancellor shall be as under-
(i) A nominee of the Chancellor. who shall be a reputed academician as the Chairperson
of the Committee:
(ii) A nominee of the Chairman. University Grants Commission; and
(iii) An academician, with not less than ten years” service as Professor, nominated by the
Executive Council
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which
he or she enters upon his or her office or until he or she attains the age of seventy
years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term
by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years. he or she
shall continue in office until his or her successor is appointed and enters upon his or
omeoued sp ATTESTED... .Qateatl A
YATA BH EDUCATIONAL SQCigT TAY vaus
AMAR Reon mac g ANS ATAY Seeing
| ¥retwise TES TOM & 3TADOVOA
Jay hog APPointed by Gove. of t to vod yd bat
di 9d. No, 22536/2022, Bap eeeengimibn! No vo? \
t 5 Ot: 16-08-2027
2, 1229/68/11, Ray Sukh pelt rthue |
--- Page 18 ---
Re
Pratt
S
NOTARY \
(5)
a)
G)
tenoits2ub3 sist
her office, however, in no case. the Vice-Chancellor shall hold office beyond the age
of seventy years:
Provided further that the Chancellor may direct the Vice-Chancellor, after his or her
term has expired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of
one year.
If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or
otherwise, or if he or she is unable to perform his or her duties due to ill health or any
other cause, the Pro-Vice- Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is unavailable, the Chancellor shall appoint
the senior most Professor who shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor, until a
new Vice-Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes the
duties of his or her office, as the case may be,
Powers and duties of Vice-Chancellor —
The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Principal Executive Officer and academic officer of
the Institution Deemed to be University and shall exercise general supervision and
control over the affairs of the Institution Deemed to be University and give effect to
the decision of all authorities of the Institution Deemed to be University,
The Vice-Chancellor may, if he or she is of the opinion that immediate action is
Necessary On any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the
Institution Deemed to be University by or under these regulations and shall report to
such authority at its next meeting the action taken by him or her on such matter.
PROVIDED that, if the authority mentioned in this sub-regulation is of the opinion
that such action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the
Chancellor, whose decision thereon shall be final.
PROVIDED further that any person in the service of the Institution Deemed to be
University who is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this
regulation shall have the right to represent against such action to the Executive
Council within ninety days from the date on which decision on such action is
communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or
reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.
The Vice-Chancellor. if he or she ts of the opinion that any decision of any authority
of the Institution Deemed to be University is beyond the power of the authority
conferred by the ae of these regulations or that any decision taken is not in the
al 1
ATTESTED rage 17 iA! & 2 | | “Tein Educational Society
~ YATA KAR’ geome ' )
WRAOM ’
tered by Gove faa to WV Serre Y
Regd. No.
H. No. 12-29/68/1
KFESARA eS
--- Page 19 ---
interest of the Institution Deemed to be University, may ask the authority concerned
to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to
review the decision cither in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the
said period of sixty days. the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision
thereon shall be final.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Executive Council. the
Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the
Chancellor, preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees to the students.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of
any authority or other body of the Institution Deemed to be University, but shall not
be entitled to vote unless he or she ts a member of such authority or body,
(6) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that these regulations are duly
observed and implemented and he or she shall have all the powers necessary to ensure
such implementation,
(7) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance
of discipline in the Institution Deemed to be University and he or she may delegate
any such powers to such person or persons, as he or she may deem fit.
(8) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the
meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee,
and other authorities.
D. Removal of Vice-Chancellor —
(1) Where there are reasons to believe that the Vice-Chancellor of an Institution Deemed
to be University does not possess the qualifications as required under the University
Grants Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance
of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations, 2018, or is not appointed as per the
procedure stipulated in these regulations or has committed any financial or
administrative impropriety. the Chairman of Commission shall constitute an enquiry
committee consisting of academic, administrative or financial experts to enquire into
the matter.
(2) On the directions from the Commission. the Chancellor shall place the Vice-
Chancellor under — pending an enquiry.
: (f\ Vy Toje Educetionel Society
D3 ejeT ALLESTEQ
YATA BHASKAR tat Wai eehaT TA ws
AM 28 AANZAHE Al
sos tes Gon 7 Inde "Vnavon 8 27205
> .VOx
"22 yignd
OV ty
--- Page 20 ---
G)
(4)
)
The enquiry committee shall give an opportunity of hearing to the Vice- Chancellor
before submitting its report to the Commission and where the report of the enquiry
committee confirms the ineligibility or procedural violations or impropriety, as the
case may be, the Commission shall direct the Chancellor to remove the Vice-
Chancellor by following due procedure:
Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations, the Chancellor may. at any
time after the Vice- Chancellor has entered upon his or her office, by order in writing,
remove the Vice- Chancellor from office on the grounds of incapacity, misconduct or
violation of these regulations:
PROVIDED that the Chancellor shall make no such order unless the Vice-Chancellor
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed
to be taken against him:
PROVIDED further that the Chancellor may, at any time before making such order,
place the Vice- Chancellor under suspension, pending an inquiry.
Pro-Vice-Chancellor —
On the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, the Executive Council shall appoint a
Professor as Pro-Vice-Chancellor to discharge the duties of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor
in addition to his or her duties as a Professor:
PROVIDED further that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not
accepted by the Executive Council, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor, who
may cither appoint the Professor recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the
Vice-Chancellor to recommend name of another Professor for re-consideration by the
Executive Council.
The term of office of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the
Executive Council. but it shall not, in any case, exceed five years or until the
expiration of the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, whichever is earlier:
PROVIDED that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be
eligible for re-appointment by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment
of Pro-Vice-Chancellor;
PROVIDED further that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties
of the Vice- Chancellor, continue in office, notwithstanding the expiration of his or
her term of office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until the Vice- Chancellor resumes office
ot ay ice-Chanc lor assumes office, as the case may be:
11 A (gales Toje Educational Society
age 19.0
ATTESTED ova. sagen Rhw
YATA BHASKAR, 8con, matte!" ° oe
ADVOCATE & iba Yo 109
Appointed by Govt. ofcinidig-8! 20. yr |
Regd. No, 22536/2022, Expiry a
H. No, 12-29/66/11, Raj Sukh aun
“FFCARA (M). MM. DIST-5S00 083.
--- Page 21 ---
(3
(4)
F.
PROVIDED also that, in any case, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining
the age of sixty-five years.
The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall have the powers and duties as may be prescribed by
the rules of the Institution Deemed to be University.
The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of such matters as
may be specified by the Vice-Chancellor on this behalf, from time to time, and shall
also exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to
him by the Vice-Chancellor.
Registrar —
(1) (a) The Registrar shall be a whole - time salaried officer of the Institution Deemed to be
(G3)
University and shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of
the selection committee consisting of the following: -
(i) Vice Chancellor - Chairperson;
(ii) One nominee of the Chancellor;
(iii) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it; and,
(iv) One expert not in the service of the University to be nominated by the
Executive Council.
(b) The meeting of the selection committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with,
and subject to the convenience of the Chancellor's nominee and the experts
nominated by the Executive Council and the proceedings of the selection committee
shall not be valid unless at least three of the Chancellor's nominees or persons
nominated by the Executive Council attended the meeting.
The Registrar shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of assuming
office, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a second term by following the
procedure prescribed for Registrar:
PROVIDED that, the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years and
the emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be
such as may be prescribed by the rules of the Institution Deemed to be University.
When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of
illness, absence. or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his or her office,
the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice Chancellor may
appoint for the purpose.
221908 lancitesun9 cic? Qa 5: r. Waa er
Dy ATTESTED. oo fistestiA
ae sovoen SHASIAR, ti cerns RIE SOFKTAZ AHS ATAY lum
YAATON B STADOVOS
3 SOS) 28% oF
Maud (wn LL Veaesnst
s-Taja MM CM) AAAS
--- Page 22 ---
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
The Registrar shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Executive Council and the
Academic Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these
authorities.
The Registrar shall be directly responsible to the Vice-Chancellor and work under his
or her direction.
The Registrar shall have the power to take disciplinary action against employees.
excluding teachers and other academic staff. as may be specified in the order of the
Executive Council and to suspend them pending inquiry. to administer warnings to
them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the withholding or increment;
PROVIDED that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in
regard to him or her,
An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing
any of the penalties specified in sub regulation (6).
In the case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the
Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry. make a
report to the Vice-Chancellor along with his or her recommendations;
PROVIDED that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the
Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty.
It shall be the duty of the Registrar —
(a) To be the custodian of the records, the common seal. and such other property of
the Institution Deemed to be University as the Executive Council shall commit to
his or her charge:
(b) To issue all notices convening meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic
Council and any Committees appointed by those authorities;
(c) To keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic
_—
Council and any Committees appointed by those authorities:
(d) To conduct the official correspondence between the Executive Council and the
Academic Council;
(c) To supply to the Chancellor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the
authorities of the Institution Deemed to be University as soon as they are issued
and the minutes of such meetings;
PoitehunIeisy , Cn Z| -
ATTESTED, ...93°°9''* — Bw
YAT. DAHA ATA
A fe MAE AN ‘Secretary
rom 2 STA
--- Page 23 ---
(f) To represent the Institution Deemed to be University in suits or proceedings by or
against the University, sign powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his
or her representative for the purpose;
({g) To perform such other duties as may be specified in the rules of the Institution
Deemed to be University or as may be required from time to time by the
Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor, as case may be:
(h
~
To enter into an agreement, sign documents, and authenticate records on behalf of
the Institution Deemed to be University:
(i) To make arrangements to safeguard and maintain the buildings, gardens, office.
canteen, cars and other vehicles, laboratories, libraries, reading rooms, equipment
and other properties of the Institution Deemed to be University; and
(j) To conduct the official correspondence on behalf of the authorities of the
Institution Deemed to be University,
G. Finance Officer —
(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of a selection committee constituted for the purpose and he or she
shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the Institution Deemed to be University.
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for
re-appointment by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of the
Finance Officer:
Provided that. the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty two years.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by
reason of illness. absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his or her
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such persons as the Vice-
Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Finance Committee but shall
not be deemed a member of such Committee.
(6) The Finance Officer shall —
(a) Exercise general supervision over the funds of the Institution Deemed to be
University and shall advise it as regards its financial policy; and
———_ 99902 ienoitesub3 get M_ Teja Educational Soci
Sa AITESTED “pageazofh FEST IA WAN
YATA BHASKAR, ithafiitli's SOKO '19 ATA \ scary
YARATO 2 STADO
Appointed ‘on ds ibnl Wo tvod yd t
wre le Sophy oe 16eeeer | 10 iged S50 SS oF
H. 12-29/68/1 MEM due {eR 11) Baie al
*KFFSARA oan peng )02-TZIG .MM .(M) ARA2
--- Page 24 ---
(b) Perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the
Executive Council or as may be prescribed by the rules of the Institution
Deemed to be University.
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council. the Finance Officer shall —
(a) Ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non-
recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all amounts of money
are expended on the purpose for which they are granted or allotted;
(b) Be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the
Institution Deemed to be University and for their presentation to the Executive
Council:
(c) Keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the
state of investments:
(d) Watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advice on the methods of
collection employed:
(c) Ensure that the registers of buildings. land, furniture. and equipment are
maintained and up-to-date and that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment
and other consumable materials in all offices, departments. schools. faculties.
centers and specialized laboratories:
(f) Bring tw the notice of the Vice-Chancellor un-authorized expenditure and other
financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault:
(zg) Call for from any office. department, school, faculty, centre, laboratory. etc.
maintained by the Institution Deemed to be University any information or
returns that he or she may consider necessary for the performance of his or her
duties; and
(h) Work under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and shall be responsible to the
Executive Council through the Vice-Chancellor.
H. Controller of Examinations —
(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of a selection committee constituted for the purpose and he or she
shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the Institution Deemed to be University.
Z ePre >: aisT @ ae ae ESS
“NOTARY \7.} ATTESTED, aot APE atta toe
5) Ruel — YATA BHASKARS 6 GHG, 309A NSAHS 6 Sécietery
eh Sessa tee f ADVOCATE & NOTARY YARATOW 8 ITA
Ne = A Govt. of India sibel to too vd
bal Regd. No. Expiry Dt: 1620020279) 90 yoqd 04
— H. No. 12-29/68/11, Raj Sukh Nagar, JegeA rite? (a8 11 \b8
KEESARA (M), M.M. DIST-500 002-Teid MM (mM)
--- Page 25 ---
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall
be eligible for reappointment by following the procedure prescribed for the
appointment of Controller of Examinations:
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty—
two years.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of
Examination shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time
to time.
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform
the duties of his or her office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such
persons as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Controller of Examination shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of
the Institution Deemed to be University in the manner as may be prescribed by the
rules of the Institution Deemed to be University.
(6) The Controller of Examinations shall be a permanent invitee to the Academic
Council.
(7) The Controller of Examinations shall ensure that all the specific directions of the
Executive Council, Academic Council, and Vice-chancellor in respect of examination
and evaluation are complied with.
I. Dean —
(1) The Departments dealing with allied subjects may be grouped into faculties or
Schools, etc., and every faculty shall be headed by a Dean.
(2) Every Dean of school or faculty shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from
amongst the Professors in the School or faculty, by rotation, for a period of two years:
PROVIDED that if there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School or faculty,
the Dean shall be appointed, for the time being. from amongst the Professor, if any,
and the Associate Professors in the school or faculty.
(3) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,
absence or any other cause, unable to perform duties of his or her office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by the senior-most Professor or Associate Professor, as
the case may be, in the School.
lenocitesun} gist ~~
» a ew, G3T2311 A _ Teja Educational Society
ATTEST.
Eo a ears ATAY nur
YATA BHASRAR. sconwcuce: fi )
ADVOCATE BHOTMN To nd vo bomncos Servetary
sotcnated Sy SE eran wine SSOL\aE255 oF bos
Regd. No. 22536/2022, teA 11 \eayes-s
Hi No. 12-29/68/11, Raj MMM) A
YSFEARA (M), M.M, DIST-
--- Page 26 ---
(4)
(3)
(I)
(3)
21.0
The Dean shall be the Head of the school or faculty or center and shall be responsible
for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the
school or faculty or centre and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed
by the rules of the Institution Deemed to be University.
The Dean shall have the right to present and speak at any meeting of the Board of
Studies or Committees of the school or faculty centre. as the case may be, but shall
not have the right to vote there unless he is a member thereof.
Head of the Department —
There shall be a Head of the Department or chairperson of the center for each of the
department or center in the Institution Deemed to be University, who shall be
appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Professors of the Department or
center:
PROVIDED that if there is no Professor in the department or center or there is only
one Professor in the department or center, whose term as Head of the department or
chairperson of the center is ending. the Vice-Chancellor may appoint an Associate
Professor as Head of the Department.
The term of the Head of the department or chairperson of the center shall normally be
two years and he or she shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by
following the procedure prescribed for appointment of the Head of the department or
chairperson of the centre.
The powers and functions of the Head of the Department or chairperson of the centre
shall be prescribed by rules of the Institution Deemed to be University,
Admission and fees structure —
A. Admission —
Admission of students to the Institution Deemed to be University shall be strictly based
on merit in the entrance exam conducted by a Government Testing Agency or the
Institution Deemed to be University and as prescribed by the appropriate statutory
authority, wherever applicable and in case of no entrance examination, the admission of
students to the Institution Deemed to be University may be made in the manner
eee in the prospectus.
1 : :
subset = ATT step Teja Educational Society
Pagelzs dfa3 | | RAN
YATA BHASKAR A sow mnoit, SPO ATA’ — “SeGhetany
meer) ited OY Som Ons re
7, Rege No Bas320z, Expy
oi ae
fro Hoe Tad
--- Page 27 ---
B. Fee Structure —
(1) Donation or capitation fee in whatever nomenclature or form, either directly or
indirectly, is strictly prohibited.
(2) The Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall follow the rules and regulations
regarding fee structure, number of seats, etc. issued by the relevant statutory
bodies and in case an Institution Deemed to be University offers different
courses which come under the regulatory ambit of different statutory bodies.
namely the University Grants Commission, the All India Council of Technical
Education, National Medical Council etc. the rules and regulations regarding fee
structure, number of seats, etc., issued by such statutory body concemed shall
be applicable.
(3) The fee shall be fixed transparently keeping in view non-profiteering or non-
commercial aspects.
(4) The fee shall be collected as declared in the prospectus of the Institution
Deemed to be University and with a proper receipt for such payment and the
prospectus shall also state that donation or capitation fee in whatever
nomenclature or form, cither directly or indirectly, shall not be collected from
the student or parent and in case of any grievance, the student or parent may
submit their complaint to the Institution Deemed to be University.
(5) The Institution Deemed to be University may provide fee concession or
scholarships or may allocate some seats to meritorious students belonging to
socially and economically deprived groups of the society.
(6) The Institution Deemed to be University shall abide by University Grants
Commission notifications, guidelines regarding the refund of fees and return of
original certificates, as may be issued from time to time.
(7) Every Institution Deemed to be University shall maintain the records of the
entire process of selection of candidates, exhibit such records on its website. and
preserve such records fora minimum period of five years.
(8) The Institution Deemed to be University shall make available the prospectus on
its website at least sixty days before the commencement of admissions,
including fee structure, refund policy, number of seats in a programme,
eligibility qualifications, admission process, etc.
gQe2 0303 it ht Gates! Teja Educational Society
: an ATTEST 26,0638 FANZAHG ATA wu
Red
A YATAB TEJA CATIONFASODERYI TAD yo
hi aa ME ASKAR, we Vulged SCOSLSEACS ov |
\ 22958202. = Appointed by Govt. JOQSM Mave (6H 11 \Ba\eS-C! ov
. Ay Regd. No. 22536/2022, Expiry Dt: A.M (1M) ARA233¥
“ec hy Gat 4. No, 12-29/68/11, Raj Sukh Nagar, Nagaram,
KOTCADA (M).'MLM, DIST-500 083.
--- Page 28 ---
(9) The Institution Deemed to be University shall not retain any original certificate
of the students, faculty members, and staff.
22.0 Institution Deemed to be University open to all —
(1) The Institution Deemed to be University shall be open to the persons of all genders
and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the Institution
Deemed to be University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of
religious belief or profession in order to entitle him or her to be appointed as a faculty
member of the Institution Deemed to be University or to hold any other office therein
or to be admitted as a student in the Institution Deemed to be University or to
graduate thereat at or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
PROVIDED that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Institution
Deemed to be University from making special provision for the employment or
admission of women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging to the weaker
section of the society and, in particular. of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
(2) All policies and procedures. in matters of admission, fee, and employment as
applicable to the university level public funded and self-financing institutions.
respectively, shall apply.
23.0 Institution Deemed to be University to be Unitary —
The Institution Deemed to be University shall be unitary in nature and shall not affiliate
any other institution
24.0 Reservation Policy —
Institution Deemed to be University shall implement the policy on reservations in
admissions and recruitment, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of
India and any Act of Parliament for the time being in force and disclose all such
information on its website.
~~
ea &
3ub9 aie? aida Teja Eaucavonsl Society
--- Page 29 ---
NOTARY
Red * } "Yate ta, ADVOCATE
ag = j* Appointed by GovtS GF IN@ibt 290 yiend ScoS wares’ om boas
25.0 Online or Distance Education —
Institution Deemed to be Universities may offer courses online or distance courses or
degrees in accordance with the regulations notified by the Commission from time to
time.
26.0 Power to Conduct Enquiry and Consequences of violation of
Regulations —
(1) > Where the Government or the Commission, as the case may be, receives information
by way of a complaint or otherwise, that an Institution Deemed to be University has
violated any of the provisions of these regulations, it shall cause to conduct an enquiry
into the facts of such information after issuing a notice to the said effect to the
Institution Deemed to be University.
(2) The Commission may also cause an inspection, to be made by experts in matters of
academics, administration, and finance regarding academic outcomes or any matter
connected with the administration or finances of the Institution Deemed to be
University for the purpose of the enquiry.
(3) Based on the enquiry or through procedures mentioned in these regulations, if the
Government or the Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied that the regulations
have been violated, the Institution Deemed to be University shall be subjected to such
action as provided in the University Grants Commission (Institutions Deemed to be
Universities) Regulations, 2023.
27.0 Funds, Accounts, Audits and Annual Report —
(1) The books of accounts of the Institution Deemed to be University shall be maintained,
managed and operated in the name of the Institution Deemed to be University and not
in the name of the sponsoring body or any other body; and, shall be kept in such form
as may be specified by the Executive Council and conform to the rules or regulations,
if any, prescribed by the Commission. in this regard,
(2) Funds shall not be diverted at any time from the accounts of the Institution Deemed to
be University to any other accounts, including to the accounts of the Sponsoring body
or any other body.
Teja Educational Society
dns star ooTEK 037231 = VAS
YATA BHASKAR Haga sbOaeAHE ATAY — Sstratary
MAELOM A STAD OVO
& NOTARY bri to fvoo ¥d DatnioggA
Regd. No. 225
(GF LI\BS\OS-£1 of
H. No, 12-29/68/11, Raj Sukh 0 MM‘ (M) ARAZSS
VPECARA (M), MM. DIST-500
--- Page 30 ---
(3)
(4)
The Institution Deemed to be University shall get its books of accounts audited
annually, separately published and uploaded on the website of the Institution and the
accounts of the Institution Deemed to be University shall also, where required, be
open for inspection by the Commission,
The annual financial statements and accounts shall be audited by a qualified
professional. a Member or Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India,
to be appointed by the Institution Deemed to be University:
PROVIDED that. the Commission may, on receipt of information regarding financial
impropriety or embezzlement or illegal diversion of funds from the accounts of the
Institution Deemed to be University: or of fees being collected against the provision
of these regulations, issue a notice directing the Institution Deemed to be University
to show cause as to why an inspection, including a forensic audit, not be ordered in
respect of the complaint, and after providing a reasonable opportunity to the
respondent institution, the Commission may on being satisfied that there were
sufficient grounds to proceed further, cause an inspection by a team of the
Commission or may direct a forensic audit; the report of and the inspection team and
the forensic audit report taken together shall form the basis for the Commission to
take further action, as it may be deem fit. under these regulations including the
recommendation for withdrawal of Institution Deemed to be University status to the
Government.
Annual Reports. Annual financial Statements, and Audit Reports shall be uploaded on
the Institution Deemed to be University website and also on the Commissions portal,
after due approval by the Executive Council
28.0 Miscellaneous —
(1)
The Institution Deemed to be University shall, as soon as may be, after the completion
of the academic programme, and in no case later than one hundred and eighty days
from the date of such completion, ensure that the degree, diploma, certificate, or any
other qualification in respect of the programme of studies. is awarded and made
available to students,
(2) The Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall compulsorily create Academic Bank
of Credits (ABC), identities of their students and upload their credit scores in digital
Yivi202 lenottagub3 gisT @h a
ATTESTED eee
page 200k BT ES | scat:
Appointed ot of India 3.375 Secretsty
Regd. No. Expiry Dt: 16-08-2027 > ri
jf H. No. 12-29/68/11, Raj ae
KEESARA (M), M.M. DIST-500'063.) 0) ©
£90 O02-Te!l0
--- Page 31 ---
lockers and ensure that the credit scores are reflected in ABC portal and adopt
Samarth e-Gov,
(3) The Institutions Deemed to be University shall not at any time enter into any franchise
agreement or arrangement, cither overtly or covertly, with any individual or
organization for establishing, maintaining, or operating the off-Campus or off-shore
campus of constituent units or course or programme of study or department or school
or faculty of the Institution Deemed to be University except in the following cases,
namely: -
(a) The Institution Deemed to be University, which is eligible under sub regulations (1)
and (2) of regulation 8 may enter into an agreement or arrangement, if —
(i) The establishment, maintenance, or operation of such institution is permitted under
any Act of Parliament or the rules or regulations made there under; and
(ii) It has made an application under sub-regulation (3) of regulation 8, after following the
procedure specified in these regulations
(b) The campus to be established under such agreement or arrangement shall be —
(i) Treated as an off-campus centre of the Institution Deemed to be University as long as
such agreement or arrangement remains valid under such law; and
(ii) Subject to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a not-for-profit entity as that of
the Institution Deemed to be University;
(c) The Institution Deemed to be University, which is eligible under regulation 8 may
enter into an agreement or arrangement for practical training of students of a skill-
oriented vocational courses, if such course is approved by the University Grants
Commission or any other body established under any Act of Parliament.
(d) Twinning Programmes, Joint Degree Programmes, and Dual Degree Programmes
shall be offered in accordance with the provisions stipulated in University Grants
Commission (Academic Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher
Educational Institutions to offer Twinning. Joint Degree and Dual Degree
Programmes) Regulations, 2022,
(c) The income and property of the Institution Deemed to be University shall be utilized
solely for promoting the objectives of the Institution Deemed to be University.
(f) The Commission shall have the power to issue directions to an Institution Deemed to
be University for implementation of any public policy of the Government or in
respect of any law in force, including appropriate directions in case of any violation of
any lav aw oF ot al en Deemed to be University. Teja Eoucational Society
FED 3001372 3TTA
TEJA EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
sg ATA BHASKAR, Mus FANZAHO ATAY -Speretary
VRATOM B 3TADOVGA
ited by Gov. Inn Noo ¥¢ betnion
hy er ae 30 wien SCOS WETS aa bees
He 12.96/, aj Sa A tiiud ia 11\2a\@E-51 ot
2-T210 .M.M ,(M) ARAZIIN
--- Page 32 ---
(zg) No portion of the income and property of the Institution Deemed to be University
shall be paid or transferred directly or indirectly, by way of dividend, bonus or
otherwise how so ever by way of profit to the persons who were at any time or are
members of the Institution Deemed to be University or to any of them or any persons
claiming through them:
PROVIDED that nothing herein contained shall prevent the payment in good faith of
remuneration to any member there of or another person as consideration for any
service rendered to the Institution Deemed to be University or for travelling or other
allowances and such other charges,
(h) In consultation with the Commission, the Government shall have the power to impose
a
(i
=
_
such other conditions. not inconsistent with these Regulations, in the notification, and
the same shall be binding on the Institution Deemed to be University.
Where the Institution Deemed to be University wishes to surrender its status of
‘Institution Deemed to be University, it shall do so with the prior permission of the
Government; and similarly, withdrawal of any Constituent Units or off-campus or of f-
shore campus of the Institution Deemed to be University from the purview of an
Institution Deemed to be University, shall require the Sponsoring body to take the
prior permission of the Government:
PROVIDED that such surrender or withdrawal, as the case may be, shall take effect
only after the last batch of students on the rolls of the Institution Deemed to be
University or its Constituent units, as the case may be, have been accorded the
opportunity to qualify for the completion of the programme of study and award of
degree.
The Institution Deemed to be University shall furnish to the Central Government or
the Commission such returns or other information with respect to its property or
activities as the Central Government or the Commission may. ftom time to time.
require, within such period as may be specified by the Central Government or
Commission.
(k) Convocations of the Institution Deemed to be University for conferring the degrees or
for other purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of
the Institution Deemed to be University.
(I) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by 2 aie ref aot less ‘hen two-
a
» thirds of the members Fesent and voting. withdraw a degree of academic distinction
b3 sia? oe Fs al
ag 31 0GHTS we
UCATIONAL ; AAN2A
YATA BHASKAR, acon, mus VAN2AHE A ee
ited by Gov. ni to Ivad ye batnioga
psd We, 70 yuan S100 ete oF .bpsr
A tdy2 (68 ,LI\BA\eS-S1 OW
palates 210 "(My amano
--- Page 33 ---
conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the Institution
Deemed to be University for good and sufficient cause:
PROVIDED that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been
given to that person calling upon him or her to show cause within such time as may be
specified in the notice as to why such a resolution shall not be passed and until his or
her objections. if any. and any evidence he or she may produce in support of them,
have been considered by the Executive Council.
(m) In the event of a conflict of opinion with regard to the interpretation of these
regulations. the opinion of the Commission shall be final.
(n) The provisions contained in the University Grants Commission (Institutions Deemed
to be Universities) Regulations, 2023 shall prevail in case of any inconsistency or
conflicting provisions in any other regulations issued by the Commission under the
provisions of the Act.
29.0 Legal Proceedings —
(1) The Registrar may sue or be sued for the purpose of any legal proceedings against
Institution Deemed to be University, who shall have the power to enter into
agreements, sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the Institution
Deemed to be University. and have the powers to exercise such powers and perform
such duties under the provisions of these regulations,
(2) No suit or legal proceedings shall lie against the Government or the Commission in
respect of anything done or purported or intended to be done in pursuance of any of
these regulations,
(3) In the event of non-compliance of any of the provisions as enumerated herein above
or any other provisions as stipulated in the University Grants Commission
(Institutions Deemed to be Universities) Regulations. 2023. the Institution shall be
liable to be subjected to one or more of the following actions, namely: -
(a) For violation of these regulations established by the enquiry committee set up by the
Commission or Government, ihetiaalion Déefited to be University shall be warned
in writing with publidindtiee andar Maeayy tipdnsidn in terms of diversification
YRATOU A
oi P Sh SOMES o Sipe ene oe departments and establishment of off-
campuses or off- ‘tevaaaaaalaeire citi: or as recommended by
the enquiry committee, WH her! oe
AR. zy ag = E Toja Educational Socieiy
CTARY ¥ oer 1 i hen hv
—, oy (Regd. No. Tee
Li H. No. 12-29/68/11, Raj Sukh Nagar,
“FFSARA (M), M.M. DIST-500
--- Page 34 ---
(b) Continuous violation of regulations established by the enquiry committee set up by
the Commission or the Government may result in closure of the Courses or
Programmes of study or Departments and off campuses or constituent institutions or
off-shore campuses or may result in withdrawal of the status of Institution Deemed to
be University:
(c) In order to protect the imerests of students in case of surrender or withdrawal of the
status, as the case may be, shall take effect only after the last batch of students on the
rolls of the Institution Deemed to be University or its constituent units, has been
accorded opportunity to quality for the completion of the programme of study and
award of degree.
Removal of Difficulty —
UGC reserves the right to remove difficulty(ies) in the course of implementation of
this MoA in consultation with the Government of India, Ministry of Education.
EEE EEE EERE EEE EERE REET E EERE
rs
ATTESTED
YATA BHASKAR, a.com, ma, 8
Appointed oe et inte
T7596) 2002, Eepky Dt: 16-08-202770)@ Educational Society
Wf. a ms Mpa paw
Page 3308s FE ATTA
TEJA EDUCATIONAL OFF > aHa ATAY
4 A FTADO
“on vd