--- Page 1 ---
Guidelines for “Ph.D. Excellence Citation”
1. Introduction

Innovation and the creation of new knowledge are essential to a country's
development. Institutions of higher learning play a crucial role in the generation of
new knowledge and innovation and the generation of new knowledge, in turn, is
largely dependent on the quality of doctoral degrees. As envisaged in the National
Education Policy 2020, exploring new frontiers of knowledge is the central doctrine
to make India a knowledge superpower. Accordingly, in an effort to promote good
quality research in Indian Universities, the UGC has instituted the “Ph.D. Excellence
Citation” to identify and felicitate the winners from different streams annually.

Against this background, a study conducted by the UGC on the Ph.Ds awarded from
2011 to 2018 provided some important insights to frame the guidelines. The study
indicates a growing trend in the number of students opting to pursue research degrees.
The total Ph.D. admissions doubled from 77798 in 2010-11 to 161412 in 2017-18. The
implicit growth rates in these numbers show that the overall Ph.D. admissions
increased at the rate of 10 percent per annum during the period. A breakup of the
Ph.Ds awarded, subject-wise, in percentage during the above-mentioned period is
given below:

No Subject Number of Ph.Ds (in
Percentage)

1 Science 30

2 Engineering and Technology 26

3 Social Sciences 12

4 Indian Languages 6

5 Management 6

6 Agricultural Sciences 4

7 Medical Sciences 5

8 Education 5

9 Commerce 3

10 Foreign Languages 3

1. Objectives of the Recognition:
e To create a quality research ecosystem, in general.

e To identify high-quality Ph.D. work among young research scholars and
recognize them.

2. Coverage:

e Theses from the streams viz. Sciences (including Agricultural Sciences,
Medical Sciences), Engineering & Technology, Social Sciences (including
Education & Humanities), Indian Languages, and Commerce &
--- Page 2 ---
Management.

e Research Scholars who have successfully defended their theses in Indian
Universities, such as State Universities, Central Universities, Private
Universities, and Deemed to be Universities are eligible to apply.

3. Number of Citations:

UGC will award ten Ph.D. Excellence Citations (two citations from each
discipline)

4. Eligibility Criteria for Universities

Universities that have fulfilled the following conditions are eligible to participate
in the Ph.D. Excellence Citation:

e Have been recognized under 2(f) of UGC Act
e Have been accredited by NAAC

5. Eligibility Criteria for Students:
e URL of the recommended thesis uploaded on the INFLIBNET website.
e Important Research Publications/Patents from the Ph.D. work
e Ph.D. theses awarded in accordance with UGC (Minimum Standards and Procedure for
Award of Ph.D. Degree) Regulations, notified from time to time.
e Has obtained Ph.D. degree through a convocation from 1* January to 31‘ December
in a year so as to participate in the Ph.D. Excellence Citation in the following year.

6. Number of Nominations:
e Every University may nominate up to five theses in a year, one from each of the
five disciplines, from the Ph.D. degrees awarded through a convocation from 1“
January to 31‘' December of the previous year.

7. Important Dates:

e Every year, UGC should felicitate the winners of the Ph.D. Excellence award on 5%
September commemorating the Teacher’s Day. The timeline for the award ceremony
would be as follows: -

> 1% January— UGC writes to universities inviting for nominations and opens the
portal.

> 31% March — Last date for the submission of nominations by the universities.

> 1% August - Recommendation of winners to the UGC by the selection committee

> 5'* September - Citation ceremony.
8. Selection Process: -

The Committee proposes a two-level selection process. A screening committee at the
University level and a selection committee at the UGC level.

Screening Committee: There will be a screening committee at the university level. Each
university may constitute its own screening committee to short-list candidates for the
“Ph.D. Excellence Citation” from five streams viz. Sciences (including Agricultural
Sciences, Medical Sciences), Engineering & Technology, Social Sciences (including
--- Page 3 ---
Education & Humanities), Indian Languages, and Commerce & Management. The
screening committee should create its own yardsticks for shortlisting candidates before
evaluating the applications. The universities shall follow the criteria given below while
short-listing candidates.

e Originality and Innovation: The thesis should demonstrate original thinking and
innovative approaches to a specific research problem or topic.

e Contribution to knowledge: The thesis should make a significant contribution to the
existing body of knowledge in the field of study.

e Methodology: The quality and rigor of the research methodology employed in the
thesis are crucial. This includes the design, execution, and analysis of the research.

e Clarity and Structure: The thesis should be well-written, organized, and structured
in a clear and coherent manner.

e Impact: The potential impact of the research findings on the field of study or on
society should be considered. India centric issues and solutions should have
priority.

e References and Citations: The proper use of references and citations to
acknowledge previous work and sources of information is important

e Presentation: The overall presentation of the thesis, including figures, tables, and
other visuals, should be of high quality.

e Defense: The candidate’s ability to defend their thesis during the viva voce or oral
examination is also taken into account.

9. Selection Committee:
e UGC will constitute five selection committees for five streams.

e Each selection committee will select two candidates from their respective streams.

Note: Given the heterogeneous nature of HEIs in the country and the prevailing
multidisciplinary education, disciplines will remain difficult to define. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the suitability of a thesis in a particular stream should be
left to the judgment of the screening committee of the universities. Similarly, the
selection committee may also have the freedom to decide on the suitability of a thesis
under a particular stream.

10. Application Portal:
Universities may upload the nominations on the application portal. The selection committee

for each stream will evaluate the nominations and recommend two theses for Ph.D. Excellence
Citation to UGC.
--- Page 4 ---
11. Felicitation:

The winners may be felicitated with a citation in a function to be organized by UGC on
September 5" of every year.

12. References:

1. Improving the Quality of Research by Faculty and Creation of New Knowledge and
Strategies for Improving Research Culture in Colleges/Universities (2019).

2. National Education Policy 2020.

TBR ARK oR