--- Page 1 ---
Guidelines on Sustainable and
Vibrant University-Industry Linkage

System for Indian Universities

University Grants Commission
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
New Delhi - 110 002
--- Page 2 ---
A Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry Linkage

System for Indian Universities

Background:

The National Educational Policy (NEP) 2020 recommends vibrant University-
Industry linkage with emphasis on exposure for students to real-life examples
and making them globally competent. It is expected that a University with a
conducive and impactful industry interface will result in innovations enabling
solutions to Global challenges. The NEP has also recommended that students,
as a part of holistic education, will be provided the opportunities with local
industry as well as research internships with faculty and researchers, which
will further improve their employability. NEP 2020 also advocates multi-
disciplinary learner-centric education, giving importance to learning

outcomes.

The “Atmanirbhar Bharat” mission of the Government is aimed at leveraging
our huge talent pool available in the education system, the huge Micro, Small
& Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector, and support from the Government in

this direction.

The guidelines focus on the Atmanirbhar Bharat mission coupled with the
incorporation of the values in education as emphasised by NEP 2020 to bring
a fresh and healthy aura to the University system and a competitive edge
through a fresh culture of effective R&D to the industry, both of which can
leverage on a strong UI linkage and in turn provide very competent manpower

to the industry and competitive manufacturing, respectively.

Objective:
1. To promote Research & Development Thrust through University-Industry
(UI) collaborations in the University to address practical R&D problems of
high societal relevance by engaging the faculty and students right from

degree (UG) college and upwards.

2. To develop the skill sets amongst the learners and make them industry-

ready through student Internships, including field/industry/on-job
--- Page 3 ---
II.

III.

skills/vocational training/life skills to effectively achieve the learning

objectives and attain desired outcomes.

To establish linkages and develop sustainable relationships between

Industry and Academia.

To create training opportunities and apprenticeship opportunities in the
industries/ R&D labs/ Research organisations/ other organisations,

including social systems across the country.

Stakeholders
Universities, Institutes, Colleges (PG/UG), Faculty and Students of Higher

Education system in the Country and Industries established in India.

Mechanisms to boost Research & Development (R&D) through
University-Industry (UI) Linkages
1. Creation of R&D Clusters:

i. Universities/Institutes/Colleges and Industries clusters may be
created at the state level. Each cluster may be led by an institute
of Central/State Government in the region.

ii. The cluster may be entrusted with the responsibility of addressing
the technological needs of the region in association with the Micro,
Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME)/ Ministry of Heavy Industries
(MHI)/Dept. of Industries of state governments.

iii. Every educational University/Institute/College may create an
Industry Relations Cell (IRC) for collaborations and every Industry,
including the MSMEs, may create a University Relations Cell (URC)
to enable the envisaged collaboration.

iv. Constitution of the Cluster R&D Advisory Committee (RAC): The
institute serving as the cluster head needs to establish a Regional
R&D Advisory Committee (RAC) for advising the R&D growth in the
cluster. The constitution of the RAC may be as follows:

a. The Director of the C-Hub - Chairperson,

b. Directors/VCs of the constituent Universities of the cluster,
--- Page 4 ---
In-charge, Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME) Dept.
in the cluster,

In-charge, Ministry of Heavy Industries (MHI) in the cluster,
One member from the Dalit Indian Chambers of the cluster,
In-charge (typically, the Principal Secretary) of Industry dept.
of the state government,

Two members from the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)/
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry
(FICCI) / Dalit Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(DICCI) /local chamber of commerce in the cluster,

In charge of Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) in the
cluster,

Head of the IRC of the C-Hub-Member Coordinator.

The RAC may co-opt one or two College Principals from the cluster

as members for a term of up to three years. The RAC may meet at

least twice a year.

Responsibilities of R&D Clusters:

a.

Liaisoning with the URCs of the industry and IRCs of the
Universities/ Institutes/ Colleges in the cluster with the
objective of enabling the proposed paradigm shift in R&D
culture.

Brainstorming on need assessment.

Identify research topics of interest (long and short time, generic
and specific), including those that have local/regional
relevance and dissemination of the same among _ the
stakeholders.

Dissemination of information within the cluster among all the
stakeholders, the IRCs, industries and industry departments
as stated in the RAC constitution.

Conduct sensitisation/awareness sessions/workshops with
the help of the IRC’s for the stakeholders.

Monitor the progress of the R&D in a cluster in association with

the IRC’s.
--- Page 5 ---
g. Holding the meetings of the Cluster R&D Advisory Committee
(RAC) and functioning as per its guidance, and creating

relationships and formalising the same through MoU’s.

2. Creation of the Industry Relations Cell (IRC) at a University/

Institute / College:

i.

il.

iii.

Industry Relations Cell (IRC) may be established by the

Universities/ Institutions / Colleges.

The main objective of the IRC is to enable collaborative project
creation between a University/Institute/College faculty group and
an industry group, and the details are enumerated as follows, which
are essentially the responsibilities of a

Universities /Institutes /Colleges.

Responsibilities of the Industry Relations Cell (IRC):

a. Liaisoning with local industry and enabling the realization of
the proposed R&D culture involving own
Universities /Institutes /Colleges and the industry.

b. Identifying research topics of interest, including those that
have local/regional relevance and dissemination of the same
among the stakeholders.

c. Identification of potential problems for collaboration, creation
of links between the concerned group of an industry and the
concerned faculty group of the University/ Institute/ College
and creation of relationships with signed MoUs as an enabler.

d. Liaison with the C-hub and IRCs of other Universities/
Institutes/ Colleges in the cluster.

e. Explore sources of funding for the cell.

f. |The drive the actions related to supporting student internships
and apprenticeship with the help of the Curriculum
development cell of the institute.

g. Monitor the progress of the work.

h. Recognize UI work.
--- Page 6 ---
3. Creation of the University Relations Cell (URC) in an Industry:

il.

iii.

Every industry, including the MSMEs may establish a URC.

The Universities/Institutes/Colleges may provide Hand-holding

support to MSMEs to adopt modern technology.

a.

g.

Responsibilities of the University Relations Cell (URC):

Liaisoning with C-hub and IRCs of the nearby Universities /
Institutes/ Colleges and enabling the realization of the
proposed R&D culture involving
Universities /Institutes /Colleges and their own industry.
Participation in the R&D needs assessment exercise by C-hub
and IRCs, promoting and carrying out activities such as R&D,
continuing education and others of mutual interest.
Understanding the present and future R&D needs of the
industry in association with the R&D setup of the industry.
Identifying the University/College/Institute groups in the
cluster and beyond who can address and serve the R&D needs
of their own industry, creating the links between them,
including the MoUs.

To drive the actions related to supporting student internships
and apprenticeships.

In association with the CSR and R&D cells of own industry and
ensuring allocation of financial support to the UI work.

Monitor the progress of the work.

4. Each cluster may create a technology-centric mechanism to capture the

6.

local problems and then assign the same as projects to the students

based on the infrastructural cum human expertise available at the host

institute of a student.

Each cluster may upload on its website the details of available

infrastructural cum human expertise for sponsored research.

The University/ Institute / College faculty may be properly incentivised

for motivated research. This can be done in different ways, such as,

6
--- Page 7 ---
a) Reforming the promotion criteria to give more weightage to IP,
technology transfers, industry linkages, etc.,

b) Offer Performance-based rewards.

7. A University-Industry (UI) day may be organised by _ the
Universities /Institutes/Colleges and Industry, showcasing the R&D

and the other work done for strengthening UI linkages.

University-Industry (UI) Linkages for Enhancements of Student

Internship and Apprenticeship in Academic and Industrial Systems:

1. The Universities/Institutes/Colleges may appoint highly experienced
industry professionals on appropriate governance bodies as per the
requirement of regulatory bodies on the Board of Studies, Academic

Councils, and other committees of the University/Institute/College.

2. The Universities/Institutes/Colleges may invite professionals from
industry as “Professor of Practice” as per the UGC Guidelines for

Engaging Professors of Practice in Universities and Colleges.

3. Universities/Institutes/Colleges and Industry may encourage the
facilitation and exchanging of experts for conducting and monitoring of
R&D projects as investigators or consultants in each other’s or joint

project and consultancy activities.

4. Universities/Institutes/Colleges may conduct specialised Workshops
and Training programmes jointly with industry on science and

technology developments.

5. The industry may provide endowments for the creation of advanced
facilities and vocational training centres as per the requirement of the

industry or for the cause of education.

6. Industries may allow faculty/ research scholars to use sophisticated
and costly equipment available in industry for research. Similarly, the
Universities /Institutes/ Colleges may allow industry to use the facilities

of the University/Institute/College for testing and certification.
--- Page 8 ---
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Industries may establish industry chairs in
Universities /Institutes/Colleges and support scholarship schemes to
attract meritorious young researchers to the

University /Institute/College.

The industries and Universities/Institutes/Colleges may jointly work
for the development of new technologies in the research labs of the
Universities/Institutes/Colleges and take benefit of technology

transfer.

The industries and Universities/Institutes/Colleges may jointly offer
collaborative degree programmes tailored for industry personnel or with

emphasis on practice for generic aspirants.

Project/dissertation work of UG and PG_= students’ of
Universities /Institutes/Colleges may be effectively executed under the
joint guidance of the faculty and experts from the industry on generic

or industry problems.

Appraisal from Universities/Institutes/Colleges on ongoing research,
expertise, facilities, equipment available in the
Universities /Institutes/Colleges, and the important events to the
industry through the IRCs would significantly enhance the

collaboration.

The industry may use this huge resource for its own R&D and
production. Similarly, communication from the industry about the
potential problems, facilities available and important events would help

the Universities /Institutes/Colleges avail the facilities.

The Universities /Institutes /Colleges may introduce
internships/apprenticeships irrespective of the field, including Arts,
Science and Engineering, as per the UGC Curriculum and Credit

framework for programmes as notified and amended from time to time.

The total credit assignment of internship/apprenticeship and its
distribution in the course of study may be as per the UGC Curriculum

and Credit Framework as notified and amended from time to time.

8
--- Page 9 ---
15. The number of Internships and type of internships may be decided by
the University/Institute/College with the approval of its Statutory
Authorities. The University/Institute/College may abide by the UGC
Curriculum and Credit framework, National Curriculum Framework,
and other relevant notifications of the Ministry of Education

(MoE)/other Ministries/ UGC/AICTE.

16.A student may take additional internships on the basis of a
recommendation from the institute or on their own depending on the

type of programme (professional/ non-professional) and own interest.

17. A University/Institute/ College may designate
i. A faculty member per course to handle and coordinate the
internships related to the academic programme and
ii. An overall in-charge, head or chairperson at the level of the

University /Institute/ College.

18. The responsibility of handling the internship may be entrusted to the
Curriculum development or placement cell, which may take the help of

the IRC for the creation of internships.

19. URC may be responsible for creating and handling the internships in

the Industry or Organisation.

20. URC may provide a coordinator and designate:
i. A hosting mentor for each or each group of students and
ii. An in-charge at the organisation (or URC) level to handle the

internships of all students granted internships.

21. The regulatory framework for the courses and the common framework
for running URC and IRC cells may be created by each University/

Institute/College and industry or organisation.

22. Companies/ firms need to be encouraged to offer paid internships to
students and make the internships sustainable. Alternatively, it may

also be treated as a CSR programme by the industries. Also, during the
--- Page 10 ---
23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

internship period companies are advised to ensure the accident

insurance protection for the participants.

University /Institute/College may do periodic or annual evaluations of

the outcomes at their level.

A University/ Institute/ College may accept an apprenticeship done in
any other institute or industry, where acceptable standards are

ensured, in lieu of an apprentice course of a programme.

The inclusion of vocational education may also be done in the present
curricular structure by making some space in terms of credits as well
as contact hours. A University/Institute/College may offer vocational
courses in the form of several electives for students to choose from

based on their own interests.

University/ Institute/ College may provide guidance to students
through faculty advisors and a Dedicated “Student Career Counselling
Cell (comprising of senior members from both the Institute and from

the Industry)”.

A University/ Institute / College may use the services of facilities and
resource persons from industry and organisations effectively to offer

training in an enriching set of courses.

Sustainability of the Proposed UI Linkage System:

1.

Financial sustainability: The University/ Institute/ College may
provide support to strengthen the mechanisms and may include (but
not limited to) the following:

i. Equity-based funding for entrepreneurial faculty.

ii. Attract CSR funding from industry (local/national level): Industry

associations play a significant role.

. Administrative sustainability: For strengthening UI linkages through

research, the following pre-requisites are necessary:

i. Formation of various cells and monitoring mechanisms by HEIs.

10
--- Page 11 ---
il.

iii.

iv.

Evolution of time-bound programmes for the different objectives by
both University/Institute/College and Industry with clear
deliverables.

Development of an aggregator platform that will coordinate and
synergise efforts from various quarters University /Institute / College
and Industry/Industry associations, etc.

Funding for IRC from  corpus/CSR_ funds/Government

projects/donations etc.

11