--- Page 1 ---
Prof. Manish R. Joshi

Vina

Heater

al ~ SE eles
ara-faera Paya
aad ARTs % sitet Bieta ager San
afea University Grants Commission

(Bret Fara, ART AAR)
(Ministry of Education, Govt. of India)

Secretary

D.O. No.F.1-6/2007 (CPP-II)(Comp.No.108737) 15 F855 1947/ 5" June, 2025

senvite Aglea/aetaa,

The Commission in its 589"° meeting held on 3 April 2025 has approved partial modification of
the UGC Guidelines for Pursuing Two Academic Programmes Simultaneously. The details of the
same are as follows:

The existing provision in point no. 5 of the | The modification approved by the

guidelines

Commission in point no. 5 of the guidelines

These guidelines shall come into effect from
the date of their notification by the UGC. No
retrospective benefit can be claimed by the
students who have already done two
academic programmes simultaneously prior to
the notification of these guidelines.

These guidelines shall come into effect from
the date of their notification by the UGC.

Provided that two academic programmes,
pursued simultaneously, before issuing of
these guidelines, in accordance with the UGC

First Degree and Master Degree Regulations,
statutes/ordinances of the university/
universities concerned, and by following the
norms prescribed by the statutory professional
council(s) and the Distance Education Council/
Distance Education Bureau of the UGC,
wherever applicable, shall be treated as valid.

Accordingly, a copy of the modified version of the Guidelines for Pursuing Two Academic
Programmes Simultaneously is enclosed herewith for reference.

All universities and their affiliated colleges/institutions are requested to implement these
guidelines for the benefit of the students.

wey,
ard,
Liste
(afer steht)
ear &,
watt faeafaqaraat & poate |
walt Aefagqaraa & sara

AGAME AKT APT, AE Ferett-110002 | Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002
aears (Ph.): 011-23236288/23239337 | aera a (gate) (E-mail) : secy.ugc@nic.in
--- Page 2 ---
Guidelines for Pursuing Two Academic Programmes
Simultaneously

a-fasim fayara

University Grants Commission
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
New Delhi

April, 2025
--- Page 3 ---
Guidelines for Pursuing Two Academic Programmes
Simultaneously

Background

The National Education Policy - NEP 2020 states that pedagogy
must evolve to make education more experiential, holistic,
integrated, inquiry-driven, discovery-oriented, learner- centred,
discussion-based, flexible, and, of course, enjoyable. The policy
envisions imaginative and flexible curricular structures to enable
creative combinations of disciplines for study, that would offer
multiple entry and exit points, thus, removing currently prevalent
rigid boundaries and creating new possibilities for life-long learning

and centrally involve critical and interdisciplinary thinking.

With the rapid increase in demand for higher education and
limited availability of seats in regular stream, several Higher
Education Institutions (HEIs) have started a number of programmes
in Open and Distance Learning (ODL) mode to meet the aspirations
of students. It has also led to the emergence of online education
programmes which a student can pursue within the comforts of her /
his home. The issue of allowing the students to pursue two academic
programmes simultaneously has been examined by the Commission
keeping in view the proposals envisaged in the National Education
Policy - NEP 2020 which emphasizes the need to facilitate multiple
pathways to learning involving both formal and non-formal education

modes.
In view of above, UGC has framed the following Guidelines.
Objectives

To allow the students to pursue two academic programmes
simultaneously keeping in view the following objectives envisaged in NEP
2020:
--- Page 4 ---
e recognizing, identifying, and fostering the unique
capabilities of each student, by sensitizing teachers as
well as parents to promote each student’s holistic
development in both academic and non-academic
spheres;

e no hard separations between arts and sciences, between
curricular and extra- curricular activities, between
vocational and academic streams, etc. in order to
eliminate harmful hierarchies among, and silos between
different areas of learning;

e multidisciplinarity and a holistic education across the
sciences, social sciences, arts, humanities, and sports for
a multidisciplinary world in order to ensure the unity and
integrity of all knowledge;

e enabling an individual to study one or more specialized
areas of interest at a deep level, and also develop
character, ethical and constitutional values, intellectual
curiosity, scientific temper, creativity, spirit of service.

e offering the students, a range of disciplines including
sciences, social sciences, arts, humanities, languages, as
well as professional, technical, and vocational subjects to
make them thoughtful, well-rounded, and creative
individuals.

e preparing students for more meaningful and satisfying
lives and work roles and enable economic independence.

Guidelines

1. A student can pursue two full time academic programmes in
physical mode provided that in such cases, class timings for one
programme do not overlap with the class timings of the other

programme.
--- Page 5 ---
to

A student can pursue two academic programmes, one in full time
physical mode and another in Open and Distance Learning
(ODL)/Online mode; or up to two ODL/Online programmes
simultaneously.

3. Degree or diploma programmes under ODL/Online mode shall be
pursued with only such HEIs which are recognized by
UGC/Statutory Council/Govt. of India for running such
programmes.

4. Degree or diploma programmes under these guidelines shall be
governed by the Regulations notified by the UGC and also the
respective statutory/professional councils, wherever applicable.

5. These guidelines shall come into effect from the date of their

notification by the UGC.

Provided that two academic programmes, pursued simultaneously,
before issuing of these guidelines, in accordance with the UGC First
Degree and Master Degree Regulations, statutes/ordinances of the
university/ universities concerned, and by following the norms
prescribed by the statutory professional council(s) and the
Distance Education Council/Distance Education Bureau of the UGC,

wherever applicable, shall be treated as valid.

The above guidelines shall be applicable only to the
students pursuing academic programmes other than Ph.D.

programme.

Based on the above guidelines, the universities can devise mechanisms,
through their statutory bodies, for allowing their students to pursue two

academic programmes simultaneously as mentioned above.