--- Page 1 ---
1.

2.

i.

ii.

iii.

NEP SAARTHI
Student Ambassador for Academic Reforms in Transforming Higher
Education in India

Introduction:

The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 aims to transform the education
system in India by focusing on quality, equity and access. The implementation
of the NEP 2020 is led by the cohesiveness and synergy across various
Regulatory authorities/ councils, Union and State Governments, and Higher
Educational Institutions (HEIs). University Grants Commission (UGC), to
implement NEP 2020, calls for collective contribution and commitment from
all key stakeholders, such as Vice Chancellors/ Directors/ Principals of
Universities/ Institutions and Colleges and, most importantly, students.
Students are the centre of these transformative reforms, so it is equally crucial

that they are involved in implementing NEP 2020.

To enhance students’ participation and make them aware of the various
reforms of the higher education system, UGC notified the SAARTHI Guidelines
in May 2023. Thereafter, the names of SAARTHIs and HEIs have been notified
so that they can carry out activities as mentioned in the guidelines. Based on
the experience gained, in supersession of earlier guidelines, these guidelines
are being revised and notified to make the SAARTHI initiative more productive

and impactful.

Objectives:
To create awareness and promote the initiatives of NEP 2020 among students

on campus.
To encourage and motivate students to actively participate in implementing
the NEP 2020 initiatives.

To establish a feedback mechanism for the UGC to understand the impact of

NEP 2020 initiatives on students and address their concerns, if any.
--- Page 2 ---
3. SAARTHI Nomination Process:

i.

il.

iii.

iv.

vi.

vii.

UGC will seek nominations from the Head of the Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs).

The HEIs will nominate the NEP SAARTHIs as per the procedure laid down
in these guidelines.

HEIs may conduct written tests followed by interviews related to NEP to

standardise and make the nomination process transparent.

The nominated students are expected to have an outstanding personality,
good communication skills, organisational capabilities for conducting

programmes, creativity, a sense of responsibility, and team leadership skills.

The nominations based on the merits shall be accepted by UGC only based

on the process defined in iii & iv and compliance with the guidelines.

UGC will notify the list of such NEP SAARTHIs on its website, which will also
be communicated to the SAARTHIs and the concerned HEIs.

The nominations submission window will remain open throughout the year.
UGC will announce the list of new SAARTHIs Half yearly; January-June;
July-December.

4. SAARTHI Nomination Criteria

i.

il.

Based on the total no. of enrolled students

Sr. No. No. of Students in the HEIs Permissible
Nominations

1 <2500 3

2 >2500 and <5000 6

3 >5000 and <10,000 9

4 >10,000 12

HEIs may nominate the SAARTHIs from different levels of programmes in

any combination given below:
--- Page 3 ---
Sr. No. Programme Nominations from
1 3 - Year UG Programme 3rd, 4th, 5th Semester of Study
2 4 —- Year UG Programme 3rd, 4th, Sth, 6th Semester of
Study
3 Post-Graduation 1st 2nd 3rd Semester of Study
4 Ph.D. 1st Year from the date of
registration

5. Responsibilities of HEIs

1.

ili.

iv.

vi.

Nominate SAARTHIs as per the criteria and process mentioned in these
Guidelines.

Notify a single point of contact (faculty in charge/any other senior
officer) for the SAARTHIs in the HEIs for the smooth conduct of their
activities.

Provide complete support to NEP SAARTHIs to discharge their
responsibilities.

NEP SAARTHIs may be involved in various HEI activities that are
relevant and appropriate.

Provide financial assistance to the SAARTHIs for conducting the
activities on NEP 2020.

Provide financial assistance to the SAARTHIs for participating in UGC-

organized events.

6. Roles and Responsibilities of NEP SAARTHI:

i.

il.

iii.

Work as an ambassador to promote NEP 2020.

Conduct awareness drives about the various initiatives of NEP 2020 every
semester in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs).

To organise the activities (debates, discussions, competitions, quizzes,
and Nukkad natakas) as per the UGC NEP SAARTHIs activity Calendar

and other activities as asked by the UGC from time to time.
--- Page 4 ---
iv.

vi.

vii.

Viii.

Disseminate information regarding NEP 2020 through Posters, Social

Media campaigns, other media, and NEP helpdesk in the HEI events.

Establish meaningful dialogue among students, faculty members, and

administrators of the HEIs.

Prepare brief notes on each NEP initiative for display on campus and

submit them online to the UGC.
Attend relevant online programmes organized by the UGC.

Collect feedback from students to improve the implementation of NEP

2020 in the prescribed format.

7. Monitoring of the SAARTHI activities

Activities undertaken by the SAARTHIs will be monitored regularly by the in-
charge from the HEI and UGC. If a SAARTHI does not carry out the assigned

activities, his/her nomination may be revoked by the UGC in consultation with the

HEIs concerned.

8. Recognition of SAARTHI

At the end of 1 year, a certificate of participation as SAARTHI will be awarded by
the HEI, subject to satisfactory performance.

wKeKEKK