--- Page 1 ---
= ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR
p-- TECHNICAL EDUCATION
siya Helter | atftwet anette aah Bren afee

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 2 ---
Ministry of i

Education Azadi xa
Government of India Amrit Mahotsav

The Ministry of Education's Tableau has been adjudged as
one of the best Tableau (under Central Ministries/Deptts.
Category), presented on the 73” Republic Day Parade
26" January, 2022). This Tableau was conceptualized
jointly by MoE's Innovation Cell and AICTE. The Tableau
showcased the key aspects of National Education Policy Co
(Q © 2020 (NEP 2020) through the theme ‘Vedas to Metaverse’. @)

Vv

+ oi LOND
ae
(
--- Page 3 ---
This Handbook is a Legal Document as per
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987)
and

All India Council for Technical Education (Mandatory Accreditation of all Programmes/
Courses in Technical Education Institution and University Departments and Institutions
Deemed to be Universities imparting Technical Education) Regulations, 2014 Notified on
29" January, 2014

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approval for conducting Vocational
Education Programme, Community College Course(s) and Skill Knowledge Provider under
National Skill Qualification Framework) Regulations, 2012 Notified on 5 December, 2012
and amended on 3" February, 2016

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Norms and Standards for the Conduct of Post
Graduate Diploma in Management) Regulations, 2017 Notified on 14'* December, 2017

and

UGC (Categorisation of Universities (Only) for Grant of Graded Autonomy) Regulations,
2018 Notified on 12" February, 2018

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Categorisation of Standalone Institutions (Sls) for
Grant of Graded Autonomy) Guidelines, 2019 Notified on 10" October, 2019

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Grant of Approvals for Technical Institutions)
Regulations, 2020 Notified on 4" February, 2020 and amended on 24" February 2021

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Open and Distance Learning Education & Online
Education) Guidelines, 2021 Notified on 3 March, 2021 and amended on 13* April, 2021

and

All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/Staff Member)
Regulations, 2021 vide F.No.1-103/ AICTE / PGRC / Regulation / 2021 Notified on
25' March, 2021

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 4 ---
FOREWORD

All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) was established in 1945 as a National Level
Apex Advisory Body and as a Statutory body by an Act of Parliament in 1987 for developing and
promoting quality technical education in the country in coordinated and integrated manner. Over
the years higher education, particularly technical education has become inclusive and available
to all those who were interested from the initial days whereas earlier it was the fortunate few
who had access to higher education particularly technical education. It has been endeavour of
AICTE to make quality technical education inclusive and affordable to all. AICTE has taken several
proactive measures for planned and qualitative growth of technical education and effectively
implemented the same.

AICTE has changed its role from regulator to facilitator and has been ensuring that with changing
time and new discovery/changes in technical education, the curriculum remains relevant and
dynamic. Relevant changes have been incorporated in Approval Process Handbook which is
published annually. Focus has always been on quality of education, simplicity of procedures and
transparency in implementation. It has always been two-way communication, suggestions of all
education partners / stakeholders have been considered and implemented wherever practicable.

In the midst of covid crisis, nation has risen successfully and is chartering a new territory in
education.

National Education Policy 2020 (NEP) aims to bridge the gap between current learning outcomes
and what is required through undertaking major reforms that brings the highest quality, equity
and integrity into the system. National Education Policy(NEP) envisages multidisciplinary
education so that boundaries are removed to promote overall development of students in
different disciplines. In this regard, in line with NEP, AICTE has added several subjects in the
eligibility list apart from Physics, Mathematics and Chemistry. Further

NEP 2020 envisages that Technical Education shall be imparted in Indian Languages also. AICTE has
already initiated steps and granted approval for conducting technical courses in Indian Languages.
It can be said AICTE has adopted the vision of NEP regarding flexibility, multidisciplinarity and
innovation in true spirit. Good infrastructure and enrolment of students only cannot ensure
quality technical education unless focused attention is given on quality teaching learning.

Endeavour of AICTE has been on supporting the institutions to get autonomy, accreditation ranking
etc. through Margdarshan, Adjunct faculty, Unnat Bharat Abhiyan, Research Promotion Scheme.
AICTE Doctoral Fellowship(ADF), Short Term Training programme (STTP), National Initiative for
Technical Teachers Training(NITTT), AICTE - IDEALAB, a MOOCs platform SWAYAM,Start-up Policy
etc. Model Curricula Teacher Training Programmes for both new Teachers and in service Teachers
through ATAL academies, Student Induction Programme, Mandatory Internship for students,
Recognition to the teachers, Examination Reforms, Support for Innovation and entrepreneurship,
Industry Interaction Cell, National Prospective Plan are some of the innovative ideas implemented
by AICTE.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 5 ---
Instead of major changes, attempts have been made in this Approval Process Handbook 2022-23
to consolidate and refine the guidelines which are already there so that process of evaluation of
applications of the institutions become hassle free. AICTE assures to all the stakeholders that it
will continue to be a facilitator taking care of changing needs of all concerned and hope that with
concerted effort of all concerned,quality of technical education in India will reach a new pinnacle
during coming days.

This handbook is an attempt to provide comprehensive information on the fair and rational
system of administration as well as other necessary information on the processes involved under
the aegis of AICTE. The emphasis on e-governance to ensure transparency and accountability,
and implementing a tech-savvy approach to enable faster processing and clearly defining the
Infrastructural norms in Institutions are just a few pointers towards AICTE’s efforts at fostering a
technical education system which is on par with the best institutions in the world.

The slogan of this year is “Vigyan Sarvatra Pujyate” means science is revered all over and will
display our scientific legacy and technology prowess that have helped find solutions to problems
in defence, space, healthcare, agriculture, astronomy, and others. Society should respect and
revere science and the scientific community, and this would be possible only through constant
interactions between the scientific community with the public. If this happens, it will indeed
create a new stronger India that can address the challenges humanity may encounter in the near
future, especially in sharing the resources essential for maintaining healthy life on this planet.

Swami Vivekananda said, “Education is the manifestation of the perfection already in man”. In
keeping with this objective, apart from regulatory role, AICTE shall continue to strive to be a
true mentor, facilitator and enabler in bringing out the best in each Institution. We hope all the
education partners/stakeholders of technical education shall also put in their best and make
team India proud and make “Atmanirbhar Bharat’ a reality.

ar: ety plerert

(Excellence in action is Yoga)

Prof. Anil D. Sahasrabudhe
Chairman, AICTE

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 6 ---
Chapter

INDEX

Contents
Foreword

Page No.

Abbreviations

vii

Definitions

xi

Preamble

XV

Grant of Approval through online application for Setting up a New Technical Institution
offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/Post Graduate Degree Level

Grant of Approval through the online application for the following:
e Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

e = Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
e Change of Site/Location

e Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
e To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

e Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the
same Campus or Same City

e Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding
Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake

e —Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

e Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa
e Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)

e Introduction of Integrated/Dual Course

e Closure of the Institution

e —Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management

e Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in
Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)

e Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type of
Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)

e Change in the Minority Status of the Institution

e Change in the Name of the Bank

e Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/Company
e Extended EoA

Grant of Approval for Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Indian and
Foreign University/ Institution in the field of Technical Education, Research and Training

42

Grant of Approval through online application for the University/ Institutions Deemed
to be University.

45

Grant of Approval for Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities
through the online application for Open and Distance Learning Education and online
Education

53

Vl

Grant of Approval through online application for Vocational Education Courses under
NSQF

64

Vil

Norms and Requirements

69

VIII

Penal Action in case of Violations of the Regulations/ Approval Process Handbook

82

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 7 ---
Appendices

1 |Norms for Duration and Entry Level Qualifications and Statutory Reservations of the Technical} 88

Programmes
2  |Approved Nomenclature of Courses 94
3 |Norms for Intake and Number of Courses/ Divisions in a new Technical Institution 122
4 |Norms for Land and Built-up Area requirements of the Technical Institutions 124
5 Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software, Internet, Printers and Laboratory] 132
Equipment of the Technical Institutions
6 |Norms for Essential and Desirable requirements of the Technical Institutions 135
7 |Norms for Faculty requirements and Cadre Ratio of the Technical Institutions 142
8 | Faculty Cadre and Qualifications 144
9 _|Norms for PGCM/ PGDM Courses 145
10 |Subscription of Journals 147
11  |Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the establishment of a new Technical Institution | 148
12. |Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging 153
13 | Structure of Various Committees 154
14 |Regional Offices of AICTE 158
15 |Grievance Redressal Mechanism for Students and Faculty 160
16 |Documents to be submitted for Setting up a new Technical Institution offering a Technical} 161
Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level
17 |Documents to be Submitted/ Uploaded for 166

Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)

Change of Site/Location

Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa

To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same

Campus or Same City

e Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding Academic
Year/ Restoration of Intake

e —Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas

Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice- versa

Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)

Introduction of Integrated/Dual Course/ Extended EoA

Closure of the Institution

Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management

Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/

Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)

e Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution

(Institution(s) converted into a University)

e Change in the Minority Status of the Institution

e Change in the Name of the Bank

e Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/Company
e Collaboration and Twinning Programme

18 |Recommended Composition of the Board of Governors of the Technical Institutions 172
19 | Academic Calendar 173
20 |Fellow Programme in Management: Conduct and Admission Procedure 174

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 8 ---
1 |Format for Forgotten Password 179
Format for the applications submitted under Chapter I/ II/ IV except Closure of the Institution | 180
Format for the establishment of a new Technical Institution while submitting the Security 183
Deposit

4 __|Format for the Progressive/ Complete Closure of the Institution 184

5 |Format for Category I/ II Universities notified by the UGC for the compliance of AICTE norms 185

6 _|Format for the release of Security Deposit 186

7 |Format of the Joint Affidavit by the Lessor and Lessee for transfer of private Property/ 187
Building under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882

8 | Format for Additional Course(s) / Increase in Intake 188

9 | Format for Change in the Name of the Bank 189

10 | Format for Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company 190

11 |Format for Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Foreign University/ Institution 191
OR Institute of National Importance /Eminence of India and AICTE Approved Institution

12 _|Format for conducting Academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body 192

13 |Format for conducting Open and Distance Learning & Online Courses 193

1 |Certificate of an Advocate 195

2 |Certificate of an Architect registered with Council of Architecture 197
Certificate of the Bank Manager where the Applicant has a Bank Account 198

1 No Objection Certificate from State Government/ UT 199

2 _|No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board 200

3 |Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company 203

4 |MoU to be signed between the Institution and Skill Knowledge Providers/Trainers 205

Annexures

1 Recommended Short and Medium Term Perspectives for Engineering Education in India by 208
the Committee to provide National Perspective Plan

2 |List of Aspirational Districts 210

3 |Closest Available Nomenclature of Under Graduate Degrees for the Diploma in Engineering 212
and Technology

4  |Closest Available Nomenclature of Diploma for the Under Graduate Degree in Engineering 221
and Technology

5 __|Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical Institution 227

6 _|Major Disciplines, their Corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch of Under 229
Graduate Degree in Engineering and Technology

7 |Major Disciplines, their Corresponding Courses and Relevant/ Appropriate Branch of Diploma | 235
in Engineering and Technology

State wise Competent Authorities to issue Certificates with respect to the Land/ Building 244

9  |Guidelines for the appointment of Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Persons from Industry in AICTE | 255
approved Technical Institutions

10 __|Mandatory Disclosures 257

11 |Format of the Undertaking to be submitted by the Applicant on Institute / University Letter 263
head for Student Induction Program, Examination reforms & Internship Policy

12 |Land Requirement as specified in the Approval Process Handbook Norms during the Previous | 264

Years
13 |Documents to be submitted to the Scrutiny Committee/ Expert Visit Committee 266
14 |MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV) 273
15 _|Ready Reckoner for Frequent Queries 274

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 9 ---
ACA Access and Circulation Area

ADF AICTE Doctoral Fellowship

AICTE All India Council for Technical Education
AlU Association of Indian Universities

ATAL AICTE Training and Learning Academy
ATMA Association of Indian Management Schools (AIMS) Test For Management Admission
APH Approval Process Handbook

ARIIA Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements
BCA Bachelor of Computer Application

B. Des. Bachelor of Design

B.E. Bachelor of Engineering

B. HMCT Bachelor of Hotel Management and Catering Technology
BoG Board of Governors

BoM Board of Management

B. Pharm Bachelor of Pharmacy

BOT Built Operate and Transfer

B.Sc Bachelor of Science

B.Tech Bachelor of Technology

B. Voc Bachelor of Vocation

CABE Central Advisory Board of Education
CAT Common Admission Test

CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education
CCTV Closed Circuit Television

CoA Council of Architecture

CMAT Common Management Admission Test
CPWD Central Public Works Department
DELNET Developing Library Network

DDA Delhi Development Authority

DME Directorate of Medical Education

D. Pharm Diploma in Pharmacy

DPR Detailed Project Report

DSC Digital Signature Certificate

DTE Directorate of Technical Education

D. Skill Diploma of Skill

D. Voc Diploma of Vocation

EC Executive Committee of AICTE

EoA Extension of Approval

ERP Enterprise Resource Planning

EVC Expert Visit Committee

EWS Economically Weaker Section

FAR Floor Area Ratio

FDR Fixed Deposit Receipt

FPM Fellow Programme in Management

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 10 ---
FSI Floor Space Index

GATE Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering

GMAT Graduate Management Aptitude Test

Gol Government of India

GPAT Graduate Pharmacy Aptitude Test

GPS Global Positioning System

HEI Higher Educational Institute

HMCT Hotel Management and Catering Technology
ICCR ndian Council for Cultural Relations

IEV nnovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development
IKS ndian Knowledge System

loT nternet of Things

IIM ndian Institute of Management

IISc ndian Institute of Science

IT ndian Institute of Technology

J&K Jammu & Kashmir

LCD Liquid Crystal Display

LMS Learning Management System

LoA Letter of Approval

Lol Letter of Intent

LoR Letter of Rejection

LWE Left Wing Extremism

MAT Management Aptitude Test

M. Arch Master of Architecture

MBA Master of Business Administration

Mbps Megabits per Second

MCA Master of Computer Application

M. Des Master of Design

M.E Master of Engineering

M. HMCT Master of Hotel Management and Catering Technology
MMS Master of Management Studies

MoA Memorandum of Association

MODROBS__| Modernization and Removal of Obsolescence Scheme
MoE Ministry of Education

MOOCs Massive Open Online Courses

MoU Memorandum of Understanding

M.Pharm _ | Master of Pharmacy

M.Tech Master of Technology

NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council
NAD National Academic Depository

NATA National Aptitude Test in Architecture

NATS National Apprenticeship Training Scheme
NBA National Board of Accreditation

NBC National Building Code

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 11 ---
NBCC National Buildings Construction Corporation

NDL National Digital Library of India

NEP National Education Policy

NEAT National Education Alliance for Technology

NEQIP North East Quality Improvement Programme
NHEQF National Higher Education Qualification Framework
NIRF National Institutional Ranking Framework

NIT National Institute of Technology

NITTTR National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research
NMAT National Management Aptitude Test

NOC No Objection Certificate

NPTEL National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning
NRI Non Resident Indian

NSDA National Skill Development Agency

NTA National Testing Agency

ocl Overseas Citizen of India

PC Personal Computer

Pcl Pharmacy Council of India

PF Provident Fund

PG Post Graduate

PGCM Post Graduate Certificate in Management

PGDBM Post Graduate Diploma in Business Management
PGDCA Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application
PGDM Post Graduate Diploma in Management

PGRC Public Grievance Redressal Cell

Ph. D Doctor of Philosophy

Pharm. D Doctor of Pharmacy
PMKVY Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana

PMSSS Prime Minister's Special Scholarship Scheme
PPP Public Private Partnership

PwBD Persons with Benchmark Disabilities

QP Qualification Packs

Qs* Quacquarelli Symonds

R&D Research and Development

RBI Reserve Bank of India

RC Regional Committee

RF Radio Frequency

RO Regional Office

RPGF Refundable Performance Guaranty Fund
RPS Research Promotion Schemes

SAC Standing Appellate Committee

SAGY Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana

SAMVAY Skills Assessment Matrix for Vocational Advancement of Youth

SCSC Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 12 ---
sD Security Deposit

SEE Sustainable Energy Engineering
SHC Standing Hearing Committee

SIH Singapore India Hackathon

SKP Skill Knowledge Providers/ Trainers

SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds DTH Channels

PRABHA

TDS Tax Deduction at Source
TELNET Terminal Emulation Programme for TCP/ IP Networks
TER Technical Education Regulatory
TFW Tuition Fee Waiver

THE Rank | Times Higher Education Ranking
UA Urban Agglomeration

UG Under Graduate

UGC University Grants Commission
UHV Universal Human Values

UT Union Territory

Wi-Fi Wireless Fidelity

XAT Xavier's Aptitude Test

* British company specialising in the analysis of higher education institutions around the world.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 13 ---
1 |"Academic Year” means academic activities of the concerned affiliating University/ Board/Technical
Institution in a Year (Odd Semester followed by Even Semester).

2  |“Act” means the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987).

“Adjunct Faculty” means resource person as per the guidelines given in Annexure 9 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

4 |"Advocate” means an Advocate registered with the Bar Council of India.

“Affidavit” is a written sworn statement of fact voluntarily made by a deponent under an oath or
affirmation administered by a person authorized to do so by Law. Such statement is witnessed
as to the authenticity of the deponent's signature by a taker of oaths, such as: a Notary Public or
Commissioner of Oaths.

6 |“AICTE Web-Portal” means the website hosted by the Council at URL www.aicte-india.org.

“Applicant” is the one who makes an application to the Council for seeking any kind of approval under
these Regulations.

8 |“Approval Process Handbook (APH)"is a Handbook published by AICTE, prescribing norms and
procedures for processing of applications submitted for grant of various approvals from time to time.

“Approved Institution” means an Institution offering Technical Programmes approved by the Council.

10 |“Approved Intake” means the maximum number of students that can be admitted in a Course
(excluding the Supernumerary Seats) as approved by the Council.

11 |“Architect” means an Architect registered with the Council of Architecture established under the
Architects Act, 1972.

12 |“Autonomous Institution” means an Institution to which autonomy is granted by UGC and is
designated to be so by the Statutes of affiliating University/ Board or by AICTE to Standalone
Institutions.

13 |“Bandwidth Contention” means the contention ratio, the ratio of the potential maximum demand to
the actual bandwidth.

14 |"Break in EoA” means break in obtaining Extension of Approval by an Institution on their-own in the
previous year(s).

15 |“Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT)” means a project financing, wherein a private entity Receives a
concession from the public sector to finance, design, construct and operate Facility stated in the
concession contract.

16 |“Chairman” means the Chairman of AICTE as described under sub-section 4(a) of Section 3 of the Act.

17 |“Co-ed Institution” means the Institution admitting male, female and transgender students.

18 |“Commission” means the University Grants Commission established under Section 4 of the UGC Act,
1956.

19 |“Company” means a Company established/ registered under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013.

20 | “Competent Authority for Admission “means an Organization that has ,the legally delegated authority,
capacity, or power to do admission to Technical Institutions in the State Government/ UT concerned.

21 |“Compliance Report” means the Report submitted by the Technical Institution complying with the
requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the deficiencies observed by Expert
Visit Committee/issues mentioned in the Show Cause Notice/Speaking Order.

22 | “Constituent College” means an Institution/ Department/ College/ School which forms a Part of the
University.

23 | “Contractual Faculty” means a resource person as per the guidelines given in Chapter VII of the
Approval Process Handbook

24 |“Council” means All India Council for Technical Education established under Section 3 of The AICTE
Act.

25 |“Course” means one of the branches of learning in a Programme such as Civil Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, etc.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | x
--- Page 14 ---
26 | “Division” means

A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) or Thirty (30) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses
in Engineering and Technology, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in Hotel
Management and Catering Technology/ Post Graduate Courses in MCA/ PGDM/ MBA Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Courses in Planning
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Applied
Arts and Crafts Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Thirty(30) seats in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree Courses in Design
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Thirty (30) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and
Technology/ Planning/ Applied Arts and Crafts/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Fifteen (15) seats in Post Graduate Courses in Design Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Sixty (60) seats in Integrated Degree Courses in Engineering and
Technology/ Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA Programme and Integrated
Degree Course in MBA Programme, excluding supernumerary seats, if any;

A batch of a maximum of Forty (40) seats in an Integrated Degree Course in Planning Programme,
excluding supernumerary seats, if any; and

A maximum of Twenty (20) seats per year in Fellow Programme in Management Programme.

27 |“EoA” means Extension of Approval granted by AICTE for the conduct of Technical Programme(s)/
Course(s) to an Institution for that Academic Year.

“Extended EoA” means Extension of Approval granted by AICTE for the conduct of Technical
Programme(s)/ Course(s) to an Institution for more than one Academic Year.

28 | “Executive Committee” means the Committee constituted by the Council under Section 12 of AICTE
Act.

29 | “Expert Visit Committee (EVC)” means the Committee constituted by the Regional Officer as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to verify offline/ online the availability of
Infrastructural facilities of an Institution.

30 | “Faculty member” means an individual qualified as per AICTE Regulations, working on Full Time basis
in an Institution/ University.

31 | “Foreign National”means the Citizen of the Countries other than India who are not of Indian origin as
defined under OCI.

32 |“Government aided Institution” means a Technical Institution that meets 50% or more of its recurring
expenditure out of the grant received from Government or Government Organizations.

33 | “Government Institution” means Technical Institution established and/ or fully maintained by the
Government.

34 | “Head of the Institution” means the Vice-Chancellor in case of a University or an Institution Deemed
to be University, the Principal/Director/such other designation as the Administrative Head of the
Institution of the Technical Institution referred.

35 | “Honours” means degree awarded by a University as per its prevalent norms

36 | “Institution Deemed to be University” means an Institution for Higher Education so declared, on the
recommendation of the Commission, by the Central Government under Section 3 of the UGC Act,
1956.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 15 ---
37 |“Lateral Entry” means admission of students into the second year of Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree
Courses as per Chapter VII of the Approval Process Handbook.

38 | “Level” means Diploma, Post Diploma Certificate, Under Graduate Degree, Post Graduate Diploma and
Post Graduate Degree Programmes

39 | “Minority Institution” means an Educational Institution established and administered by a minority
Trust/Society/Company and recognized by Competent Authority as Minority Institution up to the
duration specified.

40 |"NBA” means the National Board of Accreditation, an autonomous body initially set up by AICTE,
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.

41 |"Non-Resident Indian (NRI)” means an Indian Citizen who is ordinarily residing outside India and holds
an Indian Passport.

42 |“Open and Distance Learning (ODL)” mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities
by overcoming separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print, electronic,
MOOCs, online and occasional interactive face-to-face meetings arranged by an Institution through
Learner Support Services to deliver teaching-learning experience, including practical or work
experience.

43 |Online Learning (OL) mode means a mode of providing flexible learning opportunities by overcoming
separation of teacher and learner using a variety of media, including print ,electronic, MOOCs ina
totally Online mode

44 |“Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)” means a Foreign national, who was eligible to become Citizen of
India on 26.01.1950 or was a Citizen of India on or at any-time after 26.01.1950 or belonged toa
territory that became part of India after 15.08.1947. Minor children of such person are also eligible for
OCI. However, if the Applicant had ever been a Citizen of Pakistan or Bangladesh, he/ she will not be
eligible for OCI.

45 |“Private University” means a University duly established through a State/Central Act by a sponsoring
body viz., a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860, or any other corresponding
Law for the time being in force in a State or a Public Trust or a Company registered under Section 8 of
the Companies Act, 2013.

46 |"Programme” means the field of Technical Education, i.e. Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy,
Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts and Crafts, Design, Hotel Management and Catering
Technology, MCA, Management (PGCM/PGDM/MBA) and such other Programmes/ areas as notified by
the Act.

47 |“Public Private Partnership (PPP)” means a Partnership based on a contract or concession Agreement,
between a Government or Statutory entity on the one side and a Private Sector enterprise on the
other side.

48 |“Regional Committee (RC)” means a Committee established for each region under Section 14 of the
Act.

49 |“Regular Shift timing” means educational activities of the Technical Institution are conducted from 9
am to 5 pm.

50 | “Restoration of Intake” means restoring back to the “Approved Intake’of the Institution that was
existing prior to any penal action.

51 |“Self-Financing Institution” means an Institution started by a Trust/ Society/ Section 8 Company
and does not receive grant/fund from Central/ State Government/ UT for meeting its recurring
expenditure.

52 |“Society” means a Society registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860.

53 | “Standalone Institutions” means those Institutions which are not affiliated to any of the University/
Board, but are imparting education by means of conducting regular Courses leading to Diploma/Post
Diploma Certificate/Post Graduate Certificate/Post Graduate Diploma Levels in Management, Travel
and Tourism, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Computer Applications and Design.

54 |“Standing Appellate Committee (SAC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for considering the appeals of the Technical
Institutions.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 16 ---
55

“Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman
as per the composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the Scrutiny of Complaints
received against the Technical Institutions.

56

“Standing Hearing Committee (SHC)” means a Committee constituted by the Chairman as per the
composition specified in the Approval Process Handbook to review the Reports of Expert Visit
Committee/ replies received for Show Cause Notices.

57

“State Level Fee Committee” means a Committee notified by the concerned State Government/ UT for
Regulation of Fee to be charged by the Technical Institutions.

58

“Supernumerary seats” means Intake over and above the “Approved Intake” which includes TFW, OCI
/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries, Lateral Entry, PwBD, Kashmiri
Migrants and PMSSS seats notified from time to time.

59

“Technical Institution” means an Institution set up by the Government or Trust/ Society/ Company
for conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in the field of Technical Education, Training and Research in
Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture and Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design,
Hotel Management and Catering Technology, MCA, Management, and such other Programmes and
areas as notified by the Act.

60 |“Total Approved Intake” includes Intake approved in all the Programme(s)/ Course(s) of an Institution.

61 |"Trust” means a Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any
other relevant Acts.

62 |"“University Department” means a Department established and maintained by the University.

63 | “University” means a University defined under the UGC Act, 1956.

64 | Any other word and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the All India Council for

Technical Education Act, 1987 (52 of 1987), shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the
said Act.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 17 ---
1.

PREAMBLE

Background and Statutory Provision under AICTE Act Regarding Planning, Promotion and
Regulation of Technical Education

The beginning of formal Technical Education in India can be dated back to the mid-19" Century. The major
Policy initiatives in the pre-independence period included the appointment of the Indian Universities
Commission in 1902, issue of the Indian Education Policy resolution in 1904 and the Governor General’s
Policy statement of 1913 stressing the importance of Technical Education, the establishment of IISc in
Bangalore, Institute for Sugar, Textile and Leather Technology in Kanpur, National Council of Education in
Bengal and Industrial Schools in several provinces. Significant developments include:

i. Constitution of the Technical Education Committee of the Central Advisory Board of Education
(CABE) of 1943;

ii. Preparation of the Sergeant Report of 1944; and

iii. Formation of the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) in 1945 by the Government of
India.

AICTE was set up in November 1945 based on the recommendations of CABE to stimulate, coordinate and
control the provisions of Educational facilities and industrial development of the post war period. At that
time, a mandate of AICTE covered only Programmes in Engineering and Technology.

The growth of industries in the Country, just after independence, also demanded the need for qualified
professionals in other fields, such as Business Management, Architecture, Hotel Management, Pharmacy
etc. Although the diverse elements of Management such as Commerce, Economics, Finance, Psychology
and Industrial Sociology were being taught for a long time, the need for Management Education in a
formal way was felt in India only in the fifties. The Government of India decided in 1954 to set up a Board
of Management Studies under AICTE to formulate standards and promote Management Education. Other
major initiatives taken in Management Education include setting up of the Administrative Staff College of
India at Hyderabad in the late fifties, National Productivity Council and Indian Institute of Management
in the early sixties. Architecture was covered under the Architects Act, 1972. Subsequently, for better
coordination of the Professional Courses, Architecture Education was also placed under the purview of
AICTE.

Hotel Management Education had a modest beginning with short Programmes in Nutrition and Food
Science, which started in the late fifties. The National Council of Hotel Management and Catering
Technology were set up in 1982, to which all the Institutions of Hotel Management run by the Government
are affiliated.

Education in other professional fields such as, Pharmacy, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design has also undergone
similar developments during the post-independence period. Programmes for Technical Education, during
the first three Five Year Plans, were devoted to the expansion of Technical Education to meet the growing
demand for technical personnel at Diploma, Degree and Post Graduate Levels. From the fourth Five Year Plan
onwards, the emphasis was shifted to the improvement of quality and standards of Technical Education.
This was done through implementation of the Quality Improvement Programme consisting of three major
components that provided for M.E. /M. Tech. and Ph.D. Programmes, Establishment of Curriculum Design
and Development Cells, and Short Term Training Programmes.

Meanwhile, expansion of Institutions and Intake remained at a low Level in the Government, Private-aided
and University sectors. The Policy Shift during the eighties towards involvement of Private and Voluntary
Organizations in the setting up of the Technical and Management Institutions on self-financing basis
ushered in an era of unprecedented expansion of the Technical Education System, a trend which has
continued during successive Five-year Plans.

It was in this context that AICTE was given statutory powers by AICTE Act of Parliament in 1987, with a view
to ensure the proper planning and coordinated development of the Technical Education System throughout

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 18 ---
the Country. Technical Education in this context includes fields of Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy,
Architecture, Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and Design, Hotel Management and Catering Technology and
Management.

. The AICTE Act, 1987

AICTE Act, 1987 was passed by the Parliament, to provide for the establishment of the All India Council
for Technical Education (AICTE) with a view to ensure proper planning and coordinated development of
the Technical Education System throughout the Country, qualitative improvement of such Education in
relation to the planned quantitative growth and the Regulation and proper maintenance of norms and
standards in the Technical Education System and for matters connected therewith.

Important Provisions of AICTE Act, 1987 in Approval Process

10(g) Evolve suitable performance appraisal system for Technical Institutions and Universities imparting
Technical Education, incorporating norms and mechanisms for enforcing accountability.

10(i) Lay down norms and standards for Course Curriculum, Physical and Instructional facilities, Staff
patterns, Staff qualifications, Quality instructions, Assessment and Examination.

10(k) Grant approval for starting new Technical Institutions and for Introduction of new Courses or
Programmes in consultation with the Agencies concerned.

10(n) Take all necessary steps to prevent commercialization of Technical Education.
10(p) Inspect or cause to inspect any Technical Institution.

11(1) For the purposes of ascertaining the financial needs of Technical Institution or a University or its
standards of teaching, examination and research, the Council may cause an inspection of any
Department or Departments of such Technical Institution or University to be made in such manner
as may be prescribed and by such person or persons as it may direct.

11(2) The Council shall communicate to the Technical Institution or University the date on which any
inspection under sub-section (1) is to be made and the Technical Institution or University shall be
entitled to be associated with the inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.

11(3) The Council shall communicate to the Technical Institution or the University, its views with regard
to the results of any such inspection and may after ascertaining the opinion of that Technical
Institution or University the action to be taken as a result of such inspection.

11(4) All communications to a Technical Institution or University under this Section shall be made to the
executive authority thereof, and the executive authority of the Technical Institution or University
shall report to the Council the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for the purposes of
implementing any such recommendations as is referred to in sub-section (3).

. Vision

To be a world class organization leading Technological and Socio-economic development of the country
by enhancing the global competitiveness of Technical manpower and by ensuring high quality Technical
education to all sections of the society.

Mission
1. A true facilitator, enabler and objective regulator.
2. Transparent governance and accountability towards society.

3. Planned and coordinated development of Technical Education in the country by ensuring world class
standards of institutions through accreditation.

4. Facilitating World Class Technical Education through:

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 19 ---
e Emphasis on developing high quality Institutions, academic excellence and innovative research
and development programmes;

e Networking of Institutions for optimum resource utilization;

e Dissemination of knowledge;

e Technology forecasting and manpower planning;

e Promotion of Industry-Institution interaction for developing new products, services, and patents;
e Inculcating innovation and entrepreneurship;

e Encouraging indigenous technology;

e Focusing on Non-Formal Education and Skills;

e Providing affordable Education to all;

e Making Indian Technical Education globally competitive;

e Avision of a forward-looking Organization that has an efficient, flexible and empowered manpower,
sensitive to stakeholder’s expectations.

6. Objectives
1. Promotion of quality in technical education
2. Planning and coordinated development of technical education system
3. Providing Regulations for maintenance of norms and standards
7. Responsibilities
1. Promotion of quality of technical education
2. Policy directions
3. Review of norms and standards
4. Assessment of man power requirement
5. Liaison with Central/ State Government/ UT, University/ Board and other Statutory bodies
6. Others as provided in the Act
8. Quality Initiatives of AICTE
A gist of Quality initiatives are presented as under
Institutional Development Cell, AICTE
AICTE Grant for Organizing Conference (GOC)

The scheme provides financial support to institutes for organizing conference in offline/ online mode,
extending opportunities to the academicians and working professionals for sharing their knowledge,
experiences, innovations and inventions. AICTE approved institute with at least 8 years of existence are
eligible to apply under this scheme.

AICTE e-Shodh Sindhu Scheme (e-SS)

The Scheme facilitates subscription to e-Resources/ e-Journals (like-ASCE, ASME, WoS, Scopus, Bentham
Science etc.) and is facilitated by INFLIBNET. AICTE approved Government/Government-aided institute
offering at least one PG course are eligible to apply under this scheme.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 20 ---
AICTE Scheme for Promoting Interests, Creativity and Ethics among Students (SPICES)

The Scheme aims to energize and position students club/ chapters/ societies as facilitating entity for pursuit
of individual interests, creative work, showcasing talent, networking and teamwork opportunities, social
experience; organization and management skills, exposure to professional ethics etc. AICTE approved
institutes with minimum 5 years of existence are eligible to apply under this scheme.

AICTE Modernisation and Removal of Obsolescence (MODROB) Scheme

The Scheme offers financial assistance to modernize and remove obsolescence in the Laboratory/s,
Workshop/s, Computing facilities, to enhance the functional efficiency of technical institutions for teaching,
training and research. AICTE approved technical institutions having 10 years of existence are eligible to
apply under this scheme. Proposals reflecting financial contribution from industries are given preference.

The scheme has three variants MODROB-Regular, MODROB-Aspiring institutes and MODROB-Polytechnic.
AICTE Campus Accommodation & Facilities Enhancing Social experience (CAFES) Scheme

The Scheme offers grants for construction of hostels with an overall objective to facilitate continuation of
education and also interaction between the students beyond class hours for their all-around development.
This scheme also allows expansion of existing hostels in the institute to benefit more students. The scheme
has three variants- CAFES (SC/ST students); CAFES (North East Region-NER); CAFES (Differently-abled
students). AICTE approved Government/Government-aided engineering colleges/ University departments/
Polytechnics are eligible for the grant (institutes located in Punjab, Haryana, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland & UTs are not covered under CAFES - SC/ST students scheme).

AICTE- Grant for Augmenting Infrastructure in North Eastern Region (GAINER)

To enhance the functional efficiency of the technical institutes located in far-flung areas of North East
India, AICTE has launched a scheme for providing logistics support to the technical institutes of NER by
extending financial assistance for construction of rain water harvesting system, alternative power support
& availability/connection of internet facility

AICTE IDEA (Idea Development, Evaluation & Application) Lab Scheme

AICTE- IDEA Labs with prototyping facilities being set-up in institutions with a view to encourage students
for application of STEM fundamentals towards enhanced hands-on experience and learning by doing.
Also, to impart training on 21st century skills, like critical thinking, problem solving and design thinking,
collaboration and communication that can enhance their employability. AICTE approved engineering
colleges with at least 10 years of existence and live accreditation to one course/programme course are
eligible to apply under this scheme.

AICTE Training and Learning (ATAL) Academy

It was felt that training with latest tools and technologies is vital to keep an institute, faculty and students
competitive and more productive. Training is required for increasing the knowledge and skills of students to
make them more employable to acquire global competencies. Therefore, AICTE through newly announced
AICTE Training and Learning (ATAL) Academy started unique Faculty Development Programs in various
Emerging areas and 1000 such online FDPs were conducted in the year 2020-21. For more details, please
visit https://www.aicte-india.org/

Margdarshan Initiative

In order to maintain the quality of Technical education in the Country, it has been made mandatory that
60% of the eligible courses are to be accredited. In the absence of such accreditation, AICTE shall not
grant further extension of approval. Accordingly, Margdarshan Initiative has been introduced by AICTE
for facilitating the technical institutes to improve the quality mandate as a whole. The initiative solicits
support from senior academicians and well-established institutes to hand hold & mentor other institutes
who aspire to achieve accreditation.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 21 ---
The senior academicians from IITs/ NITs/ other AICTE approved institutes (serving or superannuated) shall
be nominated as Margdarshak (individual mentors) for guiding beneficiary institutes. Their principal role
shall be to guide, support and encourage the beneficiary institutions in their development as they work to
achieve accreditation in alignment with the broad objectives of quality mandate.

Presently AICTE has already nominated 300 senior academicians as Margdarshaks who have been mapped
to 501 beneficiary institutes for mentoring. In a similar manner, well-established AICTE approved institutes
are being nominated as Margdarshan Institute or Mentor Institute (MI) who shall adopt/ guide other
technical institutes in vicinity for achieving accreditation of NBA.

Presently 40 such institutes have been nominated as Mentor Institutions who are mapped with 462
beneficiary institutes. Thus a total of 970 institutes have been facilitated under the scheme with the overall
aim to achieve suitable accreditation status in next few years.

Faculty Development Cell
AICTE STTP-SFURTI

STTP-SFURTI intends to conduct faculty and student trainings through financial assistance from AICTE to
enable faculty members and students in the field of technical education to introspect and learn techniques
that can help prepare faculty and students to impart there research work in the development of small-scale
business for the nation.

AICTE- National Initiative for Technical Teachers Training (AICTE - NITTT)

In order to train the Inductee Teachers in AICTE approved / recognised institutions, National Initiative for
Technical Teachers Training (for Inductee Teachers) has been launched. It imparts training to the Inductee
Teachers in three phases. The first phase of the training programme for the Inductee Teachers shall be
conducted in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) mode for eight modules on the SWAYAM platform
through the NITTT portal www.nittt.ac.in followed by one-month industrial internship (second phase) and
then mentor based training (third phase).

AICTE-Best Teachers Award (Visvesvaraya Best Teachers Award and Pritam Singh Foundation Award)

This scheme is aimed to recognize the meritorious faculties on Teachers Day i.e. 5th September every year at
National level and encourage them to update themselves to the ever changing needs of higher education
at global level and thereby becoming an effective contributor towards the society.

AICTE-Quality Improvement Programme (FOREIGN UNIVERSITY)

Scheme provides scholarships to the faculty who fulfils eligibility criteria and obtains admission in the
Doctoral Degree programme leading to award of PhD degree in any of the enlisted top 500 universities/
institutes (based on the QS ranking, the Times ranking and the Shanghai ranking) in the world.

AICTE-Faculty Development Programme (FDP)

The scheme is intended to Institutions for induction training to teachers employed in AICTE approved
Technical Institutions to facilitate up-gradation of knowledge and skill. Rs 5-7 Lakh are granted for the 2
weeks FDP.

AICTE - ISTE Orientation/ Refresher Programme

The objective is to conduct AICTE-ISTE Induction/ Refresher Programmes for the teaching faculty working
in technical institutions. Total 100 Refresher programme & 50 Orientation programme with the funding of
Rs. 300000 per programme.

AICTE-Technical Book Writing and Translation

To promote use of ‘Scheduled Indian Languages’ in Technical Education for creating knowledge base in
local Languages and to encourage creation of treasure of latest technical knowledge incorporating the
newest developments by grant of financial support to the distinguished faculty/writers/translators.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | xix |
--- Page 22 ---
AICTE-Distinguished Chair Professor

The Emeritus Professor (Distinguished Practicing Engineer) Fellowship intends to utilize the expertise of
highly qualified and experienced superannuated Engineers who have made undoubtable, unchallengeable,
unparalleled and exceptional contribution to the society in their respective fields in any discipline in
engineering for the benefit of students/faculty of host institutes & of institutes located in the adjoining
areas.

AICTE-Leadership in Teaching Excellence (AICTE-LITE)

AICTE’s Leadership in Teaching Excellence (LITE) is a national programme aims to bring modern software
engineering knowledge through proven online teaching-learning methods to 100,000 teachers and 2.4
Crore students in India.

Examination Reforms Policy

Examinations play a very important role in deciding the quality of education. This policy attempts to bring
out recommendations for reforms in examination system to meet challenges of emerging engineering
education landscape. Further to complete the policy for the purposes of implementation, AICTE is
presently in the process of compiling the question banks as applicable to various disciplines in the field of
Engineering.

AICTE -Students’ Learning Assessment Project (PARAKH)

AICTE-Student Learning Assessment (PARAKH) is to evaluate technical students of India and to assess
their overall qualitative and quantitative growth during the course of study in order to get a suitable
employment. All India Council for Technical Education AICTE-SLA (PARAKH) project has been designed to
measure the benchmark levels and gains in academic and higher-order thinking skills of students and
faculties to understand the various factors that affect skill development in Technical Institutes across India.

AICTE - SLA (PARAKH)

This scheme is to motivate bridging the gap between academics and industry by providing a platform for
self-assessment of knowledge and 21* century skill capabilities in students and faculty members to ensure
global competitiveness. AICTE - SLA (PARAKH) will enable policymakers and institutions to assess global
competitiveness of students, faculty members and stakeholders to trigger necessary interventions creating
a more effective system of education in the country.

AICTE have developed and launched fully functioning portal with question bank of 1.45 lakh questions
Bank in the field of Engineering, Aptitude, Management and Emerging area has been prepared by the top
academicians, with the help of industrial tie-ups and Ed-tech companies.

PARAKH unified portal was launched on 7" January, 2022 by Secretary Higher Education, MoE - Government
of India, for all AICTE approved institutes. Utilizing the PARAKH, students and faculty members will improve
their knowledge and strength in the field of creativity, reasoning, innovation, decision building in their core
technical skills and higher order thinking skill.

360 Degree Feedback - 360 Degree feedback is aimed at benefitting the faculties, Students of Engineering
College and Polytechnics recognized by AICTE. A user-friendly app and a portal has also been designed for
the same.

AICTE Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) - No. of QIP Centres increased from 83 in 2016 to 114 in
2020. No. of faculty deputed for Ph.D. under QIP increased from 466 in 2016 to 653 in 2018 a growth of 40%
in faculty deputation.

AICTE Research Promotion Scheme (RPS) - RPS is aimed to create research ambience in the institutes by
promoting research in engineering sciences and innovations. More than 550 RPS Projects with total grant
of around Rs. 80 Cr has been sanctioned from 2013 to 2020.

| xx | AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 23 ---
AICTE Short Term Training Programme (STTP) (J&K, Ladakh and NER) - STTP intends to conduct faculty
trainings through financial assistance from AICTE to enable faculty members in the field of technical
education.

AICTE Training Programme for Physical Education Trainers/ Sport-Games Teachers/ Director of
Sports - This scheme promotes participants to develop physical fitness through mass participation in
physical activities.

AICTE Technical University Joint Training Programme for Teachers/ Librarians - The objective of this
scheme is to conduct training for faculty members to prepare them for being successful in the chosen
profession and thereby enabling an improvement in teaching learning methodology. AICTE- Technical
University Joint Training Programs for Teachers The objective of the AICTE - University training programs is
to conduct training for faculty members to prepare them for being successful in a knowledge society.

AICTE- Technical University Joint Training Programs for Librarians

The objective, of AICTE - Technical University Training program for Librarians, is to conduct training for
Librarians to prepare them for being successful and affective in a knowledge society. It provide a dynamic
and quality user centered library and information services that enhance teaching, learning and research
while inculcating life-long learning skills and fostering human development.

AICTE-INAE Distinguished Visiting Professorship Scheme - The scheme promotes professors to deliver
lectures on the state-of-art of Industry, industrial ambience and R&D needs of the industry to the students
and faculty of AICTE approved engineering colleges/ institutions only. Guide student projects/ thesis of
interest to industry.

AICTE Technical Book Writing & Translation - This scheme has been started by FDC to promote the use
of ‘Scheduled Indian Languages’ in Technical Education.

AICTE Emeritus Professor (Distinguished Practicing Engineer) - The scheme intends to utilize the
expertise of highly qualified and experienced super annuated Professionals for the benefit of student/
faculty of host institutes & of institutes located in the adjoining areas.

AICTE Professional Development Scheme - The scheme intends to provide financial assistance to regular
faculty of the AICTE approved institutes and AICTE officers on regular and deputation basis in order to
present research papers at international conferences abroad & within India.

For further information: https://www.aicte-india.org/schemes/staff-development-schemes

NEAT (National Educational Alliance forTechnology) Scheme- Ministry of Education (MoE) hasannounced
a National Educational Alliance for Technology (NEAT) as a Public-Private partnership model between the
Government (through its implementing agency AICTE) and the Education Technology companies of India.
Through an open invitation and screening, companies are invited to showcase their products on a National
Portal developed for the learners, who may procure them based on their requirements. The aim of NEAT is
to bring the best technological Products in education technology on a single platform for the convenience
of learners. Technology Products using Artificial Intelligence for customized learning or e-content in niche
areas having highly employable skills.

AICTE Internship Portal - An Internship Portal is developed by AICTE and launched on June 4, 2020 by
Hon'ble Minister of Education and Hon’ble Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs. Many institutions were
facing difficulties in tracing the adequate number of internship opportunities. To eradicate this problem,
AICTE Internship enterprise portal was developed. The portal brings together the internship opportunities
in the Government sector like MoHUA, NHAI, Railways, MoSJE, MSMEs, Corporates Sector, NGOs, Start-
ups, and Research organizations. The URL of the portal is as follows: https://internship.aicte-india.org/. It is
envisioned to reach a target of 1 crore internships by 2025.

Al Translation Tool - NEAT Cell, AICTE has developed a tool called “AICTE Translation Automation Al Tool”
with a vision to translate English language online courses into eight different Indian languages like Hindi,

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | xxi |
--- Page 24 ---
Bengali, Marathi, Telugu, Tamil, Gujarati, Kannada & Malayalam for access to a more significant number of
students in the rural area.

The translation tool has the following features:

+ Auto converted content in a particular language for reference.

+ Edit and typing feature for providing the input in the required language.
+ Audio recording facility (with play and pause button)

+ Save as draft function

+ The mathematical expression input function

+ Drag and drop function

ELIS Portal (AICTE Free e-resources) - The outbreak of the COVID pandemic in India has caused extreme
distress to the students and is a setback to academic activity. Fortunately, many companies have now come
forward and offered their e-learning contents FREE OF COST to learners. In order to foster digital learning
and support the student community across the country, the Enhancement in Learning with Improvement
in Skills (ELIS) portal (http://free.aicte-india.org/) has been designed by NEAT Cell, AICTE. It was formally
launched on 12" April 2020 by Prof. Anil Sahasrabudhe, Chairman, AICTE

AICTE Helpline (https://helpline.aicte-india.org/) - AICTE Student College support bridge internet portal
launched for students stranded by lockdown. A much-needed internet tool for supporting poor, needy
and stranded students in the midst of the lockdown due to COVID19 was launched by the Honourable
Minister for Education Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank” 4* April 2020. Marginalised and weaker sections of
the society always suffer the most when the crisis.

AICTE department wise status portal - AICTE department wise status portal has been developed by NEAT
Cell to update status online regular basis.

Indian Knowledge System (IKS) portal - In order to promote interdisciplinary research on all aspects
of Indian Knowledge Systems, preserve, and disseminate Indian Knowledge Systems for further research
and societal applications, MoE desires to create a database of individuals and organizations who have
contributed by way of Research, Teaching, Publication and Preservation of ancient and contemporary
rich Indian Knowledge Systems ranging from art, music, dance, drama, mathematics, astronomy, science,
technology, life sciences, environment and natural sciences, health care, yoga, law, jurisprudence,
economics, social sciences, psychology, philosophy, management, linguistics, oral traditions of India,
knowledge hidden in Sanskrit, Prakrit, Tamil, Pali etc. and scrutinize the information, verify, put in context
through interdisciplinary scientific investigation; create a portal for archival and dissemination of this rich
knowledge. NEAT Cell developed a portal for the same.

Scholarship Portal for SC, BC and DNT - (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment) Nearly 2 Crore
students are in the category of SC / ST / BC; they face many challenges in receiving their Scholarship. To
benefit these students development of Portal is under progress to make easy way of receiving scholarship.

Post-Graduation Scholarship

AICTE awards Post Graduate Scholarship of Rs. 12,400/- per month through its Post Graduate Scholarship
Scheme to full time GATE/GPAT qualified students admitted to AICTE approved programme Master
of Engineering, Master of Technology, and Master of Pharmacy courses in AICTE approved Institutions/
University/ Departments. The total duration of the scholarship is 24 months.

National Doctoral Fellowship Now (AICTE Doctoral Fellowship)

Admitting full time GATE/GPAT qualified research scholar for undergoing Ph.D in AICTE approved Technical
Universities/ Institutes under NDF scheme. From the 2020-21 the scheme has been transformed as AICTE
Doctoral Fellowship (ADF). The scholars are eligible for fellowship @ Rs. 31000/- per month for first two
years and Rs. 35000/- per month for 3rd year. In addition, monthly HRA and annual contingency grant of
Rs. 15000/- are also paid.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 25 ---
Skill Development Cell
KARMA (Kaushal Augmentation and Restructuring Mission of AICTE)

The scheme aims at to create skilled and certified workforce for global skills capital. It will encourage
the institutions for making the best use of available infrastructure of higher education system during off
hours for skill training by re-aligning the existing infrastructure for the skill courses specially, training AIDS,
syllabus, curriculum etc. as per NSOF aligned Qualifications. This scheme is applicable to the candidate who
have passed at least 10th standard/ it is (Model1), B Tech/ Diploma pursuing students (Model2), School
students 9" to 12" Std (Model3)

Three Models for Skilling of In-school students / school dropouts, students perusing Technical Education:
Model 1- Targeting School Dropouts after class 10" pass (long back and recent)

Model 2- Targeting Advance level Skilling of students already studying in AICTE approved Technical
institutions.

Model 3- Integrating School Education with Higher Education for skilling students. The training
under the Scheme shall be, any domain-specific demand-led skill training activity preferably in core
engineering sectors leading to employment. The KARMA web portal link is https://facilities.aicte-india.
org/KARMA/

Vocational Courses

AICTE introduced the Vocational Degree/ Diploma Programme leading to Degree or Diploma in
Vocational Education under National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) for AICTE approved institutions
from 2018- 19. The Council offered sixteen specializations of different sectors under Bachelor of
Vocation (B.Voc) and Diploma of Vocation (D.Voc).

For details refer link: - https://www.aicte-india.org/education/vocational-education
Unnat Bharat Abhiyan

The Ministry of Human Resource Development has launched a programme called Unnat Bharat Abhiyan
with an aim to connect institutions of higher education including (IITs), (NITs) and (IISERs) etc. with local
communities to address the development challenges through appropriate technologies. Every Institute
has been asked to adopt at least 5 villages each.

National Employability Enhancement Mission (NEEM)

The Council is running NEEM Scheme. The objective of the scheme is to offer on the job practical training
to enhance employability of a person either pursuing his or her Post Graduation/graduation/diploma in
any technical or non-technical stream or has discontinued studies after Class 10th to enhance his/her
employability. Till date 41 NEEM Facilitators are registered with AICTE. Around 5.9 lakh student benefitting
under this scheme from different NEEM facilitators. Around 2779 training companies under this scheme.

For details refer link: - https://www.aicte-india.org/education/vocational-education/neem_agents
UKIERI (Leadership Development Programme)

Council signed an implementation agreement under UKIERI Phase Ill to train 600 aspiring leaders from
AICTE approved institutions till March 2022, under Technical Education Leadership Development Program.
Around 597 faculties are trained under LDP program. 40 Master Trainers were selected from these
597 trained leaders. Dudley College will deliver the TELDP Master Trainer (MTs) training for these 40
high-performing participants to ensure sustainability within the TVET sector of India. Eight teams of five
Master Trainers were created for conduction of Leadership and Management workshops at 8 different
venues in India.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 26 ---
Jammu & Kashmir Employability Enhancement Training Programme: (JEET)

AICTE has signed a MoU (Jammu & Kashmir Employability Enhancement Training (JEET)) on 06th December,
2020 with ICT Academy for providing Employability Enhancement Training to the final and pre-final year
students of J&K and Ladakh. Through this MoU ICT Academy will enhance the technical skill of 5000
students to make them more employable.

Clean, Green Smart Campus Award

To recognize Institutions that are doing a good job in terms of Cleanliness, Green Cover, Sustainability,
Smart Campus etc. and to spur others into action that lead to measurable outcomes regarding engaging
students in saving water, Energy, efficient recycling of waste and effective use, etc. The inputs from Indian
Knowledge System about traditional practices are incorporated.

For details refer link: - https://www.aicte-india.org/Initiatives/clean-green-campus.
AICTE Vishwakarma Awards

All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of
India has been holding a competition “AICTE-Vishwakarma Awards-2020" to identify, recognize and Award
innovative projects of the students of AICTE approved Degree & Diploma Level Technical Institutions.

For details refer link: https://www.aicte-india.org/AICTE%20Vishwakarma%20Award%202020
Induction Programme Cell

Mandatory UHV-II Course to be conducted in 1*/2"4/3'4/4" semester for students of all branches by
qualified faculty of every branch

This is compulsory subject for all UG Degree Course in Engineering & Technology, with 03 exclusive credits.
It is recommended to offer this course either in 15, 24, 34 or 4** Semester.

UHV trained Faculty: - Institution should ensure that in every department there should be at least one
Faculty trained in UHV-II for every 120 newly joined students to teach UHV-II.

Minor Degree in Universal Human Values

AICTE has framed the curriculum for Minor Degree in Universal Human Values (UHV). The degree course
will facilitate developing sufficient number of teachers to impart value-based education right from primary
to higher education across the country.

Minor Degree will carry 18 to 20 credits in addition to the credits essential for obtaining the Under Graduate
Degree in Major Discipline. This minor degree will be offered from academic year 2022-23, initially in the
form of MOOCS on SYAWAM.

For more details, please visit the FDP-SI web portal at http://www.fdp-si.aicte-india.org
Mandatory Induction programme for students of 1* year on joining the Institution

3 weeks student induction programme for creating Level playing field, adjustment to new environment,
developing confidence, ownership, sensitization to society, dignity of individual, human values, teacher
student relationship making life in campus smooth and inspirational. The induction manual is available on
AICTE website.

Student Activity Cell (SAC):- It is recommended that each Institution should have one Student Activity

Cell (SAC) for implementation of Mandatory Student Induction Programme, Universal Human Values-l
(SIP) & related follow-up activities.

UHV trained Faculty: -

a. Institution should ensure that in every department there should be at least one UHV trained
Faculty for every 20 newly joined students to act as UHV Faculty Mentor.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 27 ---
b. Institution should also ensure that in every department there should be at least one Faculty trained
in UHV-I for every 60 newly joined students to teach UHV-| in the SIP.

For more details, please visit the FDP-SI web portal at http://www.fdp-si.aicte-india.org
Prof. Rishi Raj Gaur Award for Excellence for Institutes

To be awarded to three deserving Institutions which have made excellent contribution towards Universal
Human Values for Holistic Development and Excellence. This award will be organized for AY 2022-23
onwards.

Internship opportunities for students of Jammu & Kashmir at premier institutions of the nation
through AICTE

To provide internship opportunity to students of J&K in Institutes of Higher learning like IITs and IISERs
for inspiring, empowering, and enhancing their employability. AICTE has signed MoUs with IIT Guwahati,
IIT Kanpur, IIT Bhubaneswar, IIT Ropar, IISER Kolkata and IISER Pune to provide internship opportunities to
students of J&K.Winter Internship during 2020 is completed successfully and for 2021, 143 students were
sponsored for internship in these institutions.

Student Development Cell
AICTE - Swanath Scholarship Scheme

The Scheme is being implemented by AICTE in 2021-22 to provide encouragement and support to orphans,
wards of parents died due to Covid-19, wards of Armed Forces and Central Paramilitary Forces martyred in
action (Shaheed) to pursue higher education. This is an attempt to give every such child, an opportunity
to study further and prepare for a successful future through education in AICTE Approved institutions and
courses.

A maximum of 2000 scholarships (1000 for Degree Students and 1000 for Diploma Students) will be
awarded every year to eligible candidates as above.

AICTE - Youth Undertaking Visit for Acquiring Knowledge (Yuvak)

The scheme is intended for providing Financial Grant for conducting a Study Tour of ATAL TUNNEL by
Students / faculty of AICTE approved Institutions in the field of technical education.

PG Scholarship

AICTE awards Post Graduate Scholarship of Rs. 12,400/- per month through its Post Graduate Scholarship
Scheme to full time GATE/ GPAT/ CEED qualified students admitted to AICTE approved programme Master
of Engineering, Master of Technology, Master of Pharmacy and Master of Design courses in AICTE approved
Institutions/ University/ Departments. The total duration of the scholarship is 24 months.

AICTE Doctoral Fellowship (ADF)

Admitting full time GATE/ NET qualified research scholar for undergoing Ph.D. in AICTE approved Technical
Universities/ Institutes under NDF scheme. From the 2020-21, the scheme has been transformed as AICTE
Doctoral Fellowship (ADF). The scholars are eligible for fellowship @ Rs. 31000/- per month for first two
years and Rs. 35000/- per month for 3 year. In addition, monthly HRA and annual contingency grant of Rs.
15000/- are also paid.

AICTE Students Learning Assessment (PARAKH)

Furthering the recommendations of AICTE, National Project Implementation Unit (NPIU) & STANFORD
University’s study on Student Learning Assessment (SLA) in the country during the last three years AICTE
has prepared ASLAP portal to conduct assessments of students & faculty members of HEIs and schools.

The portal has more than 1,35,000 multiple choice questions incorporating multiple disciplines towards
improving the overall competence of students & graduates to include core disciplines, aptitude, emerging
areas and higher order thinking skills.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | XXV |
--- Page 28 ---
Assessments will lead to making the students not only employable but generating employment.

More than 80,000 students have registered with 55,000 completed the assessment. In addition, 1,200
faculty members have also taken the assessment.

AICTE Pragati Scholarship Scheme for Girl Students

Pragati is a MoE Scheme being implemented by AICTE in 2014, to award scholarship of Rs. 50,000/- per
annum to meritorious girl students to encourage them to pursue higher education. Under this scheme,
every year 10,000 scholarships (5000 for degree and 5000 for diploma) are being released per annum to
girl students of 23 States/UTs and all eligible girl students from remaining 13 States/UTs (including North
Eastern Region, J&K etc.)

AICTE Saksham Scholarship Scheme for Differently-abled (Divyang) Students

Saksham is a MoE Scheme being implemented by AICTE in 2014, aimed at providing encouragement
and financial support of Rs. 50,000/- to specially-abled children to pursue Technical Education. Under this
scheme, every year all eligible students will get the scholarship.

AICTE Lilavati Award

AICTE Lilavati Award based on the theme ‘Women Empowerment’ intends to recognize efforts being made
by AICTE approved institutions to treat women with ‘equality and fairness’ in all spheres of their lives. By
means of this initiative, all the stakeholders (especially the girl students) in AICTE approved institutions
would get a unique opportunity to present a solution to the prevalent issues of gender discrimination, such
as illiteracy, unemployment, economic and nutritional disparities, maternal mortality, human rights, etc.
If anyone has already made a successful effort towards making a mark in the society, in establishing
women’s emancipation/ empowerment at large, she/ he can showcase their efforts/ contributions under
the following sub- themes:

Women Health

Self Defence

Sanitation & Hygiene

Literacy

Women Entrepreneurship

Legal Awareness AICTE intends to seek applications for AICTE’s LILAVAT| AWARD-2021-22 based on
the theme “Women Empowerment” from the eligible teams of AICTE approved institutions, who have
undertaken remarkable intervention for the cause and made an impact that showcases their work
under eight different sub-themes.

AICTE-INAE-TG (Travel Grant for Students)

The scheme works to encourage engineering students to engage in research. It provides partial travel
assistance and registration fees to Bachelors and Masters Level engineering students for presenting
a research paper in an international scientific event (conference/ seminar/ symposium/ workshop/
exhibition etc.).

Support to Students for Participating in Competition Abroad (SSPCA)

The objective of the scheme is to provide travel assistance registration fees to a team of minimum 2 to 10
Bachelor students for attending competition on scientific event at international level in order to encourage
engineering students to improve their field of technical education.

AICTE-MITACS Globalink Research Internship (GRI) Scheme (UG)

Scheme aims to provide internship to students from non-affluent families in India the opportunity to engage
in research collaboration with Canadian universities, and promote in them a research oriented career.

Accelerate International Implementation Plan (Mobility for research with an industry partner in Canada)

AICTE had extended the scope of MoU by adding an Annexure-l into the existing MoU, signed between
MITACS, Canada and AICTE on 21 September 2020. The Accelerate International programme will support 30
students studying in the Masters programme from India to participate in advanced research projects with

| xxvi | AICTE ‘F} APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 29 ---
a Canadian industry partner for 4 to 6 months under the supervision of their home university academic
supervisor and, where applicable, a host university academic supervisor. This is applicable for 3 years,
starting January 1, 2021 and ending December 31, 2023.

Happiness Metrics Scheme

Stress is a reality in each campus. AICTE has taken a view to initiate an Affirmative Happiness Action.
(AHA) To deal with stress and to support, encourage and motivate happiness on campus and amongst
students an APP titled “Your One Life” has been introduced together with a handbook titled: Six-Sigma
Happiness.

Swayam Cell
AICTE as a NC for Self- Paced and other courses

MHRD vide Order No.8-26/2014-TEL, dated 2™ August, 2017 appointed AICTE as the 9" National Coordinator
(NC) for all courses that do not fall in the purview of any of the existing NCs, including foreign university
courses as per Terms of Reference contained in SWAYAM MOOC Guidelines 2017. AICTE has constituted
Academic Advisory Council (AAC) consisting of eminent Experts from multi-disciplinary areas for evaluation
of the proposals and appropriate recommendations for perusal and approval of the Competent Authority.
There are a total number of 266 online courses uploaded on SWAYAM Platform through AICTE as a National
Coordinator which consists of 167 ARPIT Courses for faculty of all Engineering Institutions, 94 Self-paced
Courses and 5 credit courses.

AICTE as a NC for ARPIT under PMMMNMTT Scheme

MHRD vide Order No.8-26/2014-TEL, dated 28 September, 2018 appointed AICTE as the National
Coordinator for ARPIT under Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching
(PMMMNMTT) Scheme.

The Ministry of Human Resource Development launched Annual Refresher Programme in Teaching
(ARPIT), a major and unique initiative towards online professional development of 1.5 million higher
education faculty using the MOOCs platform SWAYAM on 13‘ November, 2018 with an aim to enhance
the Professional Skills of faculty by way of online courses in various disciplines developed by the domain
experts. AICTE has so far coordinated ARPIT 2018, ARPIT 2019 and ARPIT 2020 (RR) as per the statistics
given below:

DESCRIPTION ARPIT-2018 ARPIT-2019 ARPIT-2020
(Re-Run)
Total ARPIT Courses 71 48 48
Total Enrolments 53500 153655 80405
Exam Conducted on 30" March 2019 16" Feb 2020 21% August 2021
Faculty Appeared for Exam 4300 12485 6947
Faculty Awarded Certificate/passed 1980 10234 6172

Translation of SWAYAM Online Courses by AICTE

MHRD vide OM No.17-8/2020-TEL, dated 28" April, 2020 assigned a target for translation of 80 SWAYAM online
courses to IITM/AICTE into 8 different Indian Languages in compliance of Review Meeting taken by Hon’ble
Minister for HRD on 20.04.2020.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 30 ---
A total number of 128 online Courses were identified for translation in FIRST PHASE based on difficult,
popular and basic subject courses of First Year Engineering Courses. Out of these 128 courses, a number of 106
SWAYAM/NPTEL courses were further identified for translation into eight (8) different Indian Languages
by IITM/AICTE. However, transcription of 88 courses only was available with IITM and remaining 18 courses
required to be transcribed into English. AICTE has been assigned 19 online courses for translation into twelve
(12) different Indian Languages.

Out of 19 online courses, AICTE has completed translation of six (6) online courses on off-line mode and the
remaining 13 online Courses have been assigned on Al Tool developed by AICTE.

Under manual process of translation of six courses, AICTE has completed translation of 2744 lectures and
validation of 1822 lectures into eight (8) different Indian Languages. Translation of these courses into four (4)
additional languages, as per directions of MoE, has been initiated.

Out of 13 courses assigned to Al Tool, a number of 540 lectures have been translated and 95 lectures are under
process. It is hoped that we get the translation of these 13 courses through Al tool soon.

Translation of SWAYAM Courses in Indian Languages

MoE vide letter No.8-2/2019-TEL, dated 09.09.2021 informed that in a meeting chaired by Hon’ble Education
Minister on 6th September, 2021, it has been decided that courses on SWAYAM (Engineering as well as non-
Engineering) should be available in Hindi, English and 11 other Indian Languages viz. Assamese, Odia, Punjabi,
Urdu, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Tamil & Telugu.

In compliance of the above letter dated 9th September, 2021, SWAYAM Cell has taken the approval of
Competent Authority vide Note No.21, dated 28th September 2021 for undertaking the translation into 12
different Indian Languages with an additional fund of Rs. 1,35,87,548/-. This requirement of fund will be sent
to MoE after the release of earlier balance of Rs. 2,24,92,192/- yet to be released by MoE.

Development of Yoga Credit Courses by S-VYASA for SWAYAM Platform

In pursuance of Order No.8-26/2014/TEL, dated 2"! August, 2017 issued by Government of India, Ministry
of Education, Department of Higher Education, TEL Division, New Delhi regarding appointment of AICTE
as National MOOCs Coordinator for all courses that do not fall in the purview of any of the existing NCs,
including foreign university courses, AICTE has signed a MoU with Swami Vivekananda Yoga Anusandhana
Samsthana (S-Vyasa), Bangalore for development of Sixteen (16) online “Yoga Credit Courses” for SWAYAM.
The Ministry of Education has sanctioned and released an amount of Rs. 2.16 Crore for development of these
Yoga Credit Courses for SWAYAM.

A Joint Working Group (JWG) has also been constituted as per MoU for review and finalisation of the detailed
plans for Development of Sixteen (16) Yoga Credit Courses for SWAYAM Platform. S-VYASA has initiated the
process for creation of the Yoga Credit Courses for SWAYAM assigned to them.

Research & Innovations Development Schemes
Collaborative Research Scheme (CRS) Under TEQIP

To provide research grant for young TEQIP faculties recruited in different TEQIP institutes so as to collaborate
for research and build research community among TEQIP Faculty, Regular faculty of Project institutions (focus
and non-focus) & Premier institutions of the country.

For any Technical Query, kindly contact 011-29581335 or email: crsteqip@aicte-india.org
General Schemes
Saansad Aadarsh Gram Yojna

Saansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana is a rural development programme broadly focusing upon the development
in the villages which includes social development, cultural development and spread motivation among the
people on social mobilization of the village community.

|xxv AICTE ‘+} APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 31 ---
PM CARES for Children Scheme 2021

PM CARES for Children Scheme has been launched by the Prime Minister for taking care of children who
lost both parents during the COVID pandemic. Such childrens who are issued “PM CARES Certificate” shall
be eligible for admission in Polytechnic Institutions under Supernumerary quota. They shall be eligible for
SWANATH Scholarship. Their shall be two supernumerary seats per course per institute.

Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements (ARIIA)

ARIIA is an initiative of Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Govt. of India to systematically
rank all major higher educational institutions and universities in India on indicators related to “Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Development” amongst students and faculties.

9. Current Status of Technical Education

The growth of Technical Education in the Country before independence was very slow. The number of
Engineering Colleges and Polytechnics in 1947 was 44 and 43 with an Intake capacity of 3200 and 3400
respectively.

Due to the efforts and initiatives taken during successive Five-year Plans and particularly due to Policy
changes in the eighties to allow participation of Private and Voluntary Organizations in the setting up of
Technical Institutions on self-financing basis, the growth of Technical Education has been phenomenal.
Technical Education at all Levels in the Country is witnessing a consistent growth pattern marked by the
setting up of new Technical Institutions and the improvement of the existing ones in tune with the quality

assurance norms set by the regulating and accreditation agencies.
2
Ea
PS
=
g
c=
- =
ba
=
Ml

10,000,000

1,000,000
100,000
2
R
a
Ss
S
10,000
1,000
100
1
1

3,698,766

1,953,178
3,550,925
3,391,497

1,857,268

795,648

3,279,933

1,860,645
3,086,665

1,662,321

x

a
3
=
=

721,880

716,226
794,931

654,986

31,177
10,392
25,101
10,415
19,643
21,219
15,821

°

: 2
&
os

&

=
a

2016-2017 2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020 2020-2022 2021-2022
@ No. of Institutes mj Total Approved Intaxe @ Total Enroliment
@ Number of Student Placed @ Closed Instittes @ Intake Reduced due to Closure of institutes

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 32 ---
Institutions with Intake in 2021-22
Region/ Approved Institutions Approved Intake Approved Approved

State/UT ploma G UG In Intake

Chhattisgarh 13,400 3,940 27,432
Gujarat 142 171 197 54,487 51,482 21,894 370 1,27,863
Madhya Pradesh 198 232 455 39,245 75,170 89,286 616 2,03,701
Central Total 402 447 690 1,03,824| 1,40,052| 1,15,120 1,086 3,58,996
Andaman and 2 1 468 90 2 558
Nicobar Islands
Arunachal 8 1 2 840 360 228 10 1,428
Pradesh
Assam 35 26 26 5,165 5,355 1,845 67 12,365
Jharkhand 61 27 20 16,362 7,863 3,335 93 27,560
Manipur 3 1 1 342 150 36 4 528
Meghalaya 3 2 2 370 510 150 7 1,030
Mizoram 3 2 2 270 180 92 5 542
Nagaland 8 2 1 465 180 30 11 675
Odisha 165 108 149 47,607 40,036 22,851 318 1,10,494
Sikkim 2 4 2 525 840 216 6 1,581
Tripura 10 3 5 1,630 660 294 14 2,584
West Bengal 184 112 97 40,209 36,679 9,823 287 86,711
Eastern Total 484 289 307 1,14,253 92,903 38,900 824 2,46,056
Chandigarh 5 7 11 930 1,800 912 15 3,642
Delhi 21 23 60 5,825 12,004 12,149 83 29,978
Haryana 134 124 163 34,244 30,870 16,986 287 82,100
Himachal 28 25 16 4,460 3,995 884 53 9,339
Pradesh
Jammu and 31 13 17 5,379 4,080 1,461 54 10,920
Kashmir
Punjab 141 114 136 34,604 30,139 13,223 276 77,966
Rajasthan 147 117 112 32,652 37,209 11,823 297 81,684
North-West 507 423 515 1,18,094| 1,20,097 57,438 1,065 2,95,629
ota
Bihar 83 66 47 19,811 15,365 4,442 170 39,618
Uttar Pradesh 543 297 432 1,26,011 92,246 49,697 925 2,67,954
Uttarakhand 120 52 57 13,537 10,648 5,321 178 29,506
Northern Total 746| 415| 536| 1,59,359| 1,18,259| 59,460 1,273 3,37,078
Andhra Pradesh 284] 355 487 70,434| 1,56,762| 72,412 685 2,99,608
Telangana 139 238 398 38,317 1,17,093 65,752 511 2,21,162
South-Central 423 593 885 1,08,751| 2,73,855| 1,38,164 1,196 5,20,770
ota
Karnataka 314 247 362 79,673 1,15,656 53,006 736 2,48,335
Kerala 114 182 192 28,008 53,719 18,289 352 1,00,016
Lakshadweep 1 90 1 90
South-West 429 429 554 1,07,771| 1,69,375 71,295 1,089 3,48,441
Puducherry 9 17 9 2,402 7,170 1,495 26 11,067
Tamil Nadu 486 499 603 1,78,498| 2,52,812 68,740 1,203 5,00,050
Southern Total 495 516 612 1,80,900| 2,59,982 70,235 1,229 5,11,117
Dadra and 1 1 2 390 60 96 3 546
Nagar Haveli
Daman and Diu 2 1 636 300 3 936
Goa 9 9 7 2,923 1,640 900 18 5,463
Maharashtra 495 504 680 1,15,688 1,49,651 84,474 1,210 3,49,813
Western Total 507 515 689 1,19,637| 1,51,651 85,470 1,234 3,56,758
Grand Total 3,993| 3,627) 4,788| 10,12,589)| 13,26,174| 6,36,082 8,996 29,74,845

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 202
--- Page 33 ---
Approved Institutions Deemed to be Universities with Intake in 2021-22

Region/State/UT Institutions Deemed to be Approved Intake Approved Total
Universities Institutions Approved
Diploma UG PG Diploma UG ee

Gujarat 1 1 180 120 1 300
Central Total 1 1 180 120 1 300
Arunachal Pradesh 1 1 360 210 1 570
Assam 1 1 1 180 360 87 1 627
Odisha 2 3 4,060 1,389 3 5,449
Eastern Total 1 4 5 180 4780 1686 5 6646
Chandigarh 1 1 730 251 1 981
Delhi 1 1 4 60 120 737 4 917
Haryana 5 5 2,650 978 5 3,628
Punjab 1 3 3 360 3,070 640 3 4,070
Rajasthan 1 2 5 300 1,710 1,032 6 3,042
North-West Total 3 12 18 720 8,280 | 3,638 19 12,638
Uttar Pradesh 3 3 2,430 846 3 3,276
Uttarakhand 1 1 1,110 600 1 1,710
Northern Total 0 4 4 0 3540 1446 4 4986
Andhra Pradesh 3 5 7,190 1,859 5 9,049
Telangana 5 6 3,440 2,486 6 5,926
South-Central Total 0 8 11 ) 10630 | 4345 11 14975
Karnataka 1 13 21 60 8,320 6,552 22 14,932
Kerala 3 3 980 844 3 1,824
South-West Total 1 16 24 60 9,300 | 7,396 25 16,756
Tamil Nadu 4 35 31 240 45,083 | 11,418 38 56,741
Southern Total 4 35 31 240 45083 | 11418 38 56741
Maharashtra 2 11 15 120 3,279 6,484 17 9,883
Western Total 6 46 46 360 48,362 | 17,902 55 66,624
Grand Total 11 91 109 1,320 85,072 | 36,533 120 1,22,925

AICTE ‘¥» APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK
--- Page 34 ---
Variations of Intake in AICTE Approved Institutions in last Five Years
(Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate and Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Degree)

Year Diploma/ Engineering Pharmacy Architecture Hotel MCA Management Applied Design Approved
Post and And Planning Management Arts And Intake

Diploma _ Technology & Catering Crafts
Certificate Technology

2017-2018 | 81,891 1661318] 1,30,767 9,389 6,031 85,074 | 3,11,132 1,207 22,86,809
2018-2019 | 70,271 15,86,544 | 1,38,280 11,012 5,733 73,653 | — 3,02,068 1713 21,89,274
2019-2020] 70,030 14,96,439 | 1,63,582 10,615 6,638 64,030 | — 3,00,900 2,036 | 1,915 | 21,16,185
2020-2021 | 78,077 1434370 | 1,11,263 8,991 7,096 66418 | 3,07,518 1817 | 2,140 | 20,17,690
2021-2022 | 82,375 1389973 | 79,167 7,334 7,766 70,245 | — 3,20,680 2248 | 2,468 | 19,62,256
GrandTotal| 3,82,644 | 75,68,644 | 623,059 | 47,341 33,264 —|3,59,420| 15,42,298 | 9,021 | 6,523 | 1,05,72,214

Approved Intake for Standalone Institutions for Open and Distance Learning Mode in 2021-22

Region State Institutions Approved Intake in PGDM/PGCM
South-Central Andhra Pradesh 3 4750
North-West Delhi 3 5050
Central Gujarat 1 10000
South-West Karnataka 3 15550
Western Maharashtra 7 48540
Southern Tamil Nadu 7 16680
South-Central Telangana 2 11500
Northern Uttar Pradesh 1 10000
Northern Uttarakhand 1 9500

Grand Total 28 131570

Innovation & Start-up Ecosystem Development in

HEls
5000
4000
3000
2000
- ol of0 Els
. ae. nt
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
gi No. of Insttutions Established lIC gw No. of Insttutions Adopted Startup Policy

w@ No. of InsttutionsPaticipated inARIIA m= No. of Innovation/Start-ups Nurtured

Fig. 2. Implementation of Start-up Policy in AICTE Approved Institutions

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 202
--- Page 35 ---
10. NEP 2020 Perspectives and Future of Technical Education in India

The year 2019-2020 and the period till date has been a year of great transformation in the educational
scenario. The Council has undertaken major activities during this year. NEP 2020, The New Education Policy
approved by the Union Cabinet is set to bring a slew of major changes. One of the stated aims of the policy
is to instil a “deep-rooted pride” in being Indian, not only in thought, but also in spirit, intellect, and deeds,
as well as to develop knowledge, skills, values, and dispositions that support responsible commitment to
human rights, sustainable development and living, and global well-being.

Certain activities which AICTE is already focused towards the changes as proposed in the NEP 2020 since
last three years by means of various initiatives and activities such as preparation of ‘Short & Medium Term’
Perspective Plans for Engineering Education in India which focusses on the demand for courses on Artificial
Intelligence (Al), Internet of Things (loT), Machine Learning, Block Chain, Robotics, Quantum Computing,
Data Sciences, Cyber Security, 3D Printing & Design and other emerging technological areas.

AICTE has a mantra for a transparent and a robust system of governance with portals for approval process,
vocational programme, internship and other activities and initiatives. The vision of the organization is to see
itself as a world class body in technological and socioeconomic development of the Country by enhancing
the worldwide competitiveness of technical manpower

AICTE is receptive to the technological changes happening across the global scenario and believes in
framing new policies & initiatives and augment the existing ones by scheduling workshops, conferences
etc. providing a platform of discussion and inputs from stakeholders. It has been and shall always be the
endeavor of AICTE to bring the best educational system for its students and be the epitome of developing
bright, noble and humble brains in light of the NEP 2020.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 36 ---
CHAPTER-I

New Institution

Grant of Approval for Setting up a New Technical Institution offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/Post
Diploma Certificate/Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level

1.1 Introduction

a. The New Technical Institution shall be established by providing Infrastructure and other
requirements as per the norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

b. New Technical Institution offering Technical Course(s)/ Programme(s) shall not be established
without prior approval of the Council.

c. Admission Authority/ Body/ Institution shall not admit students to any Technical Programme
of an Institution, which do not have requisite prior approval of the Council.

d. The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central,
State and Local Laws and norms of other Regulatory Bodies also, if applicable.

e. In view of the large number of vacant seats in various Programmes during the last few years and
the likely future demand, the Council shall not grant approval to the new Technical Institutions
at the Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Level in Engineering and Technology in line
with the recommendations of the Committee Annexure 1 set up by AICTE to provide the
National Perspective Plan for Technical Programmes. However, establishment of new Technical
Institutions in Engineering and Technology shall be permitted only in cases where

Government of India is providing financial assistance to State Government/ UT in
Un-served/ Underserved / Aspirational Districts where NO Government/ Government
Aided Technical Institution offering the same Level in Engineering and Technology is
already available.

State Government / UT (based on their perspective plan) is providing financial assistance
for establishment of Technical institutions in order to offer the Engineering and Technology
Programme / Courses at DIPLOMA/UG/PG level where NO Government/Government
Aided Technical Institution offering the same level in Engineering & Technology is already
available in that particular district. The Government must have budget provision of
minimum 2100 lakhs and requisite land for establishment of new institute.

State Government proposes to start a New Polytechnic (Engineering and Technology) for
conducting courses in Conventional/Emerging/ Multidisciplinary/ Skill/ Vocational area
(including PPP mode).

New Institutes (Engineering and Technology) with courses in Emerging area as well as in
Conventional/Traditional area for NE States, J&K, Ladakh and in Aspirational Districts of
different States/ UT.

Philanthropical organization existing for more than 25 years and running other educational
institutes having minimum enrollment of 10000 students having NIRF (if applicable)
Ranking within 100.

Any industry having a minimum annual turnover of 5000 Cr (in preceding three years)
subject to its application as a registered trust/society/Company established under Section
8 of the Companies Act, 2013.

Applicants whose application were rejected and issued Final LoR in the previous academic
year 2021-22.

1.2. Time Schedule for Processing of the Applications

a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website from time to time, inviting applications with cut off dates for various categories and
processing thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/AICTE Website shall
be final and binding. To grant approval for establishment of a Technical Institution, online
application on AICTE Web Portal is mandatory. Applications submitted offline shall NOT be
accepted.

b. The submission of an application on AICTE Web Portal and payment shall not be later than the
last date as notified in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 37 ---
1.3 Application for Seeking Approval of the Council
1.3.1 For Setting up a New Technical Institution proposed to offer a Programme in

a. Engineering and Technology/ Planning/ Applied Arts, Crafts and Design/ Hotel
Management and Catering Technology (Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Level)

b. MCA
c. Management (Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level)

d. Architecture / Pharmacy institutions willing to seek AICTE approval provided they have
prior approval of respective council.

1.3.2 Eligibility of the Promoter
a. A Society, registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/
Secretary of Society;
OR
b. ATrust, registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to time or any
other relevant Acts through the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust;
OR
c. ACompany established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013;
OR
d. Central/ State Government/ UT Administration or by a Society/Trust registered with them.

e. The above bodies shall apply individually or under Public Private Partnership (PPP)/
Build- Operate-Transfer (BOT) mode through an Officer authorized by Central/ State
Government/UT.

f. A Company having any foreign equity directly or indirectly as shareholding shall NOT be
permitted to apply for setting up a Technical Institution (with exceptions provided by the
Government).

1.3.3. New Institutions are NOT eligible to apply for the Introduction of NRI/ OCI / FN/ Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries/ Twinning/ Fellow Programs.

1.3.4 Institutions applying under various Schemes of MoE:

a. MoE, Government of India for the promotion of Technical Education in un-served/
underserved Districts across the Country has initiated the Scheme of "Sub-Mission on
Polytechnics" for the opening of Polytechnics by the respective State Government/ UT. The
scheme shall be applicable to the Districts where no Polytechnics are already available.
If any of the mentioned Districts are carved out administratively, then those carved out
Districts shall also be considered under the Sub-Mission Scheme.

b. Policy initiatives have been taken by MoE, to establish a Technical Institution by the
respective State Government/ UT in “Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts/
Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected” as notified by the Central Government from
time to time (or) in a District where there is NO Technical Institution. The list of
Districts identified as Higher Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts is given in
Annexure 2 of the Approval Process Handbook. If any of the mentioned Districts are
carved out administratively, then those carved out Districts shall also be considered under
the Educationally Backward (Aspirational) Districts/ Left Wing Extremism Scheme.

c. Theconcerned State Government/ UT, seeking approval of AICTE for these Institutions under
the above mentioned schemes is required to apply individually online on AICTE Web-Portal.
Applications shall be processed by way of obtaining an undertaking from the Chief Secretary
of the respective State Government/ UT that the Land has been transferred in the name of
the proposed Institutions, sufficient funds have been allotted to start the construction of
the permanent Campus and that these proposed Institution(s) are being established in the
respective State/UT under the abovementioned Schemes initiated by the MoE.

d. Such application shall be processed through Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee for the
proposed location. Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the
Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be forwarded to the Regional Committee (RC) and
further to Executive Committee (EC) for the grant of approval.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 38 ---
e. The Institutions shall function in a temporary Campus and shall move to their permanent
Campus within 2 years from the date of issue of the Letter of Approval (LoA). Further, AICTE
shall inspect such Institutions through Expert Visit Committee (EVC) to assess the status
of readiness of the State Government/ UT for operationalization of these Institutions in
the permanent Location as per the procedure for Change of Site/ Location. In case of the
Institutions not shifting to the permanent location even after 2 years and fulfilling the
norms of the Approval Process Handbook, the “Approved Intake” in the Course(s) shall be
reduced to 50%. Similarly, if an Institution has not shifted even after 4 years, the Council
shall take appropriate action.

1.3.5. The existing Institutions approved by other Regulatory Bodies, seeking approval for the first
time from AICTE for conducting Technical Programme(s):

a. Offering Course(s) in Applied Arts and Crafts/ Vocational (Technical) Programme without
having approval from AICTE.

b. Non-Technical Institutions already running MBA/MCA courses without approval of AICTE
(for such Institutions, exclusive building and Director/Principal are not required. However,
the Institutions should fulfil all other norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook
such as separate Head of the Department, Faculty, Infrastructure, Built-up area, etc).

NOTE: In all the above cases, Institutions seeking approval for the first time from AICTE
shall submit an online application through the AICTE web portal @ www.aicte-india.org
as a New Technical Institution for all their existing Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).

1.4 Submission of Application by the Promoter
1.4.1. Allotment of USER ID

a. Anunique USER ID with password shall be allotted to each new application for setting up
of a new Technical Institution on payment of %5000/- (Five Thousand Only), through the
payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org

b. If any existing Institution has forgotten the Password, the Institution shall apply online
for a new password. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of =5000/- (Five
Thousand Only) shall be made through the payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
@ www.aicte-india.org. The proof of payment and an Affidavit 1 for”Forgotten Password”
shall be submitted to the concerned Regional Office. Regional Officer shall verify and
upload on the Web-Portal and make necessary recommendations on the portal for
allotment of Password to the Applicants.

c. Using the USER ID, Online application in the prescribed Form shall be filled and submitted
on AICTE Web-Portal@ www.aicte-india.org and a unique identification number is allotted
to each application for further reference. The Applicant shall be able to track the status of
the application at various stages of processing using this unique identification number.

1.4.2. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges

a. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges = in Lakh for Setting up a new Technical
Institution offering a Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under
Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level are given below:

SI.No. Type of Institution TER Charges
% in Lakh

i Minority Institution/Institution setup in J&K/Ladakh/North Eastern 6.0
States/Institution setup exclusively for Women/PwBD

ii Government/Government Aided Institutions/PPP mode Nil

iii All other Institutions except clause 1.3.1(d)* 8.0

iv ALL Applicants under (i) and (iii) whose applications were rejected and 2.0
issued Final LoR in the previous year i.e. 2021-22**

* TER charges for clause 1.3.1(d) shall be applicable as per Table2.3.3

** Not applicable for Applications, which were, rejected in 2021-22 and TER Charges refunded under Clauses
1.4.2 (g) and 1.4.7 (b) of this Chapter.

NOTE: Applicants under (iv) are not eligible for refund of TER Charges as per Clauses 1.4.2 (g) and 1.4.7 (b) of
this Chapter.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 39 ---
b. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee (including Court directions to any
type of Institutions) has to be conducted, then the Applicant has to remit 0.5 Lakh
through online as an additional TER Charges.

c.  Inan extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee (Online /Offline)
has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the
Applicant has to remit 1.0 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.

d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal @
www.aicte-india.org within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.

e. Only those applications submitted within the cut-off date, including payment shall be
considered for processing.

f. In case of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be
refunded to the Applicant.

g. Applications submitted under Clause 1.3.1 and 1.3.5, if rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision, the TER Charges after a deduction of
0.5 lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant/Institution.

h. In case of rejection of an application submitted under Clause 1.5.2, if opted for the
issue of Extension of Approval of the existing Programme(s), refund shall be made after
deducting the applicable TER Charges.

1.4.3. All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited in their online application on AICTE
web portal @ www.aicte-india.org are correct. Facility to edit the data will be available until the
final submission of the application. After the final submission, the data entered is not allowed
for any further editing till the processing of the application is completed. Applicants shall
exercise utmost caution before pressing the “SUBMIT” tab. All the online applications should
be DIGITALLY SIGNED (using Digital Signature Certificate-DSC) and submitted on AICTE Web-
Portal on or before the last date as notified in the Public Notice /AICTE web-portal.

NOTE: Institutions shall NOT be Permitted to Submit Applications without DSC.

1.4.4. All Applicants shall submit an Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public
Notary or an Oath Commissioner on =100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper (Digitally
Signed).In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, civil and/or criminal
as per the Regulations in place.

1.4.5 All the Applicants shall submit a copy of the application (as submitted on AICTE portal) to the
State Government/UT and affiliating University/ Board immediately and get a receipt with the
Official Seal from the authorized signatory for the same.

1.4.6 All the Applicants shall upload one set of documents as per Appendix 16 of APH (Digitally
Signed by Chairman /Secretary of the Trust /Society /Company) on AICTE web portal. Any
document uploaded on AICTE web portal without Digital Signature shall not be considered as
valid document.

NOTE: 1) In case of Government Institutions, all the documents to be uploaded on AICTE Web
portal shall be Digitally Signed by Director/Principal/Designated Officer Appointed for the
Approval purpose.

2) Online Applications complete in all respects (including processing fee, if applicable) shall
ONLY be processed as per the procedure defined in this Approval Process Handbook.

1.4.7. Views of State Government/ UT and affiliating University/Board

a. The State Government/ UT and the Affiliating University/ Board shall forward their views
on the application received by them to the concerned Regional Office of AICTE NOT later
than one week from the last date specified for submission of application as per the Public
Notice / AICTE Web portal.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 40 ---
b. Based on the views (if any) of the State Government/ UT and the affiliating University/
Board for setting up of new Technical Institution, the Regional Committee shall take a
decision about the processing of application or to reject the same. If the application is not
processed further, the TER Charges after a deduction of 0.5 Lakh (Rupees Fifty thousand
only) shall be refunded to the Applicant.

c. Intheabsence of the receipt of views from the State Government/ UT/ affiliating University/
Board on the application within the stipulated time, the Council shall proceed for further
processing.

1.5. Establishment of a New Technical Institution
1.5.1 | Requirements and Eligibility

a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the Land as required and its Lawful
possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company on or
before the date of submission of application.

b. Requirements for Technical Institution shall be as per the norms specified in Chapter VII of
the Approval Process Handbook.

c. Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be
prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor
and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State
Government/ UT. However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects
as per the Infrastructure requirements.

d. The Head of the “Technical Institution” shall be named as the “Principal/ Director” having
qualifications as per AICTE norms as defined for Principal in a Programme of the Technical
Institution.

1.5.2 The existing Institution applied for Closure of the Institution are also eligible to apply for
starting a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same Academic year. Technical
Institutions applying under this Clause shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure
of the Institution for the existing Programme(s) and shall apply for a different Programme.
However, the Applicant has to make Material/ Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan,
Site Plan, etc. duly approved by the concerned Competent Authority (if applicable) to suit the
requirements of the new Programme.

a. In case of such application being approved, the existing Institution shall be considered
as CLOSED (Progressive/ Complete Closure, as applicable) and the liabilities, if any, arising
out of this, shall solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution.

b. Incase of the application being rejected, the same shall be processed for the Closure of the
Institution/ issue of Extension of Approval as per the choice mentioned in the application.

1.5.3. Thefund position of the Applicant shall be (except Government/ Government Aided Institution/
Central/ State University) in the form of FDRs and/ or Bank accounts in the Nationalized Bank
or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by Reserve Bank of India as mentioned in the table,
on the date of Scrutiny.

SI. Programme proposed (Diploma/ Post Total minimum funds required as proof of

No. Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Operational Expenses at the time of Scrutiny in the
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree) | Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company (% in Lakh)

Engineering and Technology
ii | Planning 50
iii_ | Applied Arts and Crafts 50
iv |Design 50
v_|Hotel Management and Catering Technology 50
vi_|MCA 50
vii_ | Management 50

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 41 ---
1.5.4 The Applicants cannot use the name of Technical Institution in such a way that the abbreviated
form of name of the Technical Institution becomes IIM/IIT/IISc/NIT/IISER/IIT/IEST/AICTE/UGC/
MoE/Gol. The Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government/ India/ Indian/ National/
All India/ All India Council/ Commission in the name of the Technical Institution giving an
interpretation that it is a Govt. Institute while being a fully Private Institute and other names as
prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided
that the restrictions mentioned above shall not be applicable, if the Technical Institution is
established by the Government of India or its name is approved by the Government of India.

1.5.5. Applicants shall NOT use the names of the existing Institutions within the State. The existing
Institutions having the same names run by the same/different Society/Trust/Company within
the State/UT shall at least add the name of the Village/Town/City where it is located as an
integral part of the name of the Institution.

1.5.6  Alllnstitutions shall use the same font and size for the full name of the Institutions, wherever it
is displayed.

1.5.7. The Courses as per Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be opted for a
new Technical Institution at Diploma/Under Graduate/Post Graduate Level, a combination
of Diploma, Under Graduate and Post Graduate Levels shall not be approved. However, the
“Maximum Intake allowed” for the Programmes shall be as per Appendix 3 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

1.5.8 Procedure

a. The application shall be processed as per the Procedure of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ EVC as
per Clause 1.6/ 1.7 as applicable.

b. The application under existing Clause 1.5.2 of this Chapter shall be processed first
for Closure of the Institution by online/offline (as applicable) Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee, if found in order, then only the application shall be processed further for the
establishment of new Technical Institution following the respective procedures specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.

1.6 Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee:

a. The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated by Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval Process Handbook by the Regional
Officer by selection of committee members through the automated selection process on the
AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable
to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then Regional Officer with
prior approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to pick another expert from the
approved panel of the experts manually. Under extraordinary circumstances, the Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny Committee shall also be constituted manually by the Regional Officer with prior
approval of the Chairman.

b. The date and time for Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be informed by the concerned
Regional Office to the institutes and the concerned experts.

c The concerned Regional Officer or an Officer of the Council shall assist the Committee and
place/share relevant records and documents before the Committee and make necessary
arrangements for the conduct of the meetings; however, he/ she shall not be part of the
Committee.

d. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by Chairman / Secretary
of the trust) along with Self-Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the
supporting documents before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.

e. Applicants shall present their application and ALL original documents along with self-attested
copies as per Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, before the Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain absent at the time
of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 42 ---
f. The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the
Applicant as mentioned above and shall countersign (if verified offline) all the documents that
are accepted.

g. Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company throughAICTE Web-Portal.

h. Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny shall be
eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by the concerned
Regional Office.

i. The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify ONLY the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
committee as per the norms and standards and shall countersign (If verified offline) all the
documents that are accepted.

j. Applications that are found to be in order in all respect by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny shall be
processed further for EVC.

k. The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that all fields of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee Report are filled completely.

I. Applicant shall submit one set of attested copies of original documents to the Regional Office,
produced during online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny committee.

1.7. __ Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee

a. The Expert Visit Committee shall be constituted as per Appendix 13 of the Approval
Process Handbook by the Regional Officer by the selection of committee members through
an automated process in the AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Expert Visit
Committee is unable to attend or refuses or in capacitated to take part in such scheduled visit,
then Regional Officer with prior approval of the Competent Authority (AICTE), shall opt to
choose another expert from the approved panel of the experts manually. Under extraordinary
circumstances, the Expert Visit Committee shall also be constituted manually by the Regional
Officer with prior approval of the Chairman. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify Physically/
Online the infrastructural facilities of the institution.

b. Additional experts, if required, may also be co-opted in any of the Committee for processing of
applications, Complaints, etc.

G An Expert Visit Committee shall visit Physically / Online the proposed premises of the Institution
to verify the following:
i. | Readiness with respect to Appendix 4 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Instructional,

Administrative and Amenities area requirements for the First Year of the Technical
Institution as per the Building Plan duly accepted and counter-signed by the Scrutiny/

Re- Scrutiny Committee members( in case of offline).

ii. | Readiness with respect to Appendix 5 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Computer,
Software, Internet, Printers, Laboratory Equipment, Books, Journals and Library facilities
of the Technical Institution.

iii. Readiness with respect to Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook, i.e. Essential
and Desirable requirements of the Technical Institution.

iv. Progress related to appointment of Principal/ Director and Faculty with respect to the
norms, standards and conditions prescribed by the Council.

d. The concerned Regional Officer shall make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the
Expert Visit Committee; however, he/she shall not be a part of the expert committee. Experts
shall carry the Identity Card of their Organization.

e. The Expert Visit Committee shall have access to the Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.

f. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify actual availability of Equipment as per the Curriculum
and Syllabus of the affiliating University/ Board and Computers, Software, Internet, Printers,
Book Titles, Book Volumes, subscription of National and International Journals and entry in

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 43 ---
the Stock Registers as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The mere presentation of
Purchase Orders/ Payment records for subscription, etc. without the actual availability of items
shall not be considered.

g. The Expert Visit Committee shall also verify documents in original as mentioned in
Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook with respect to actual Infrastructure visited.

h. Applicant shall submit one set of attested copies of original documents to the Regional Office,
produced during online Expert Visit Committee.

i. In case of online Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall prepare a video showcasing all
the infrastructural facilities for not less than 30 minutes and shall upload the same in YouTube
privately and share the linkin the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable)

as mentioned in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on
portal.

In case of off line Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall arrange for Video recording
(institution expense) with the date and time of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit
Committee. The institution shall upload the same in YouTube privately and share the link in the
web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 16
of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.

NOTE: The video recording with briefing by one of the Institute representative for not less
than 30 minutes shall cover the entry and exit of the Committee with time, the Building
Plan approved and signed by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, GPS Coordinates at the
entrance of the main Building, Class rooms, Laboratories, Workshops, Office Room, Barrier
free environment facilities such as ramp/ lift/ toilets, Library, Computer Centre, meeting with
Students and Faculty members (in case of existing Institutions), in addition to the recording
of other details. The Institute shall also arrange Laptop/Desktop with Internet facility, Scanner
and Printer to the Expert Visit Committee (only in offline mode)

j. The Expert Visit Committee shall submit the following to the Regional Office (If conducted in
offline mode)

1. _ Its visit Report in the prescribed format.

2. Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 16 of the
Approval Process Handbook

3. Confirmation regarding uploading of Video recording of the Expert Visit Committee in
you tube and link on AICTE web portal.

4. Attendance sheet duly signed / authenticated by the members of the Expert Visit
Committee and representatives of Applicant Trust/ Society/Company present during the
visit.

k. The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that the Expert Visit Committee Report is complete
in all respect.

I. The scanning and uploading of the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee Report and Expert Visit
Committee Report shall be done by the concerned Regional Office.

1.8 Evaluation of the Application by Regional Committee

a. The Reports of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee and Expert Visit Committee, as applicable, shall
be made available to the Regional Committee. The Regional Committee shall consider these
Reports along with the views of concerned State Government/ UT and affiliating University/
Board, if any, and shall recommend the application for further processing. The Regional Officer
shall ensure that the Regional Committee Report is complete in all respect.

b. Regional Officer concerned, while forwarding the recommendations of the Regional Committee
for further processing of issuance of LoA or otherwise to AICTE Headquarters shall verify that
the procedure and parameters prescribed under these Regulations and Approval Process
Handbook are followed by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, Expert Visit Committee and
Regional Committee.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 44 ---
c The Approval Bureau at AICTE Headquarters shall also verify that the procedures and
parameters prescribed under these Regulations and Approval Process Handbook are followed.
The concerned Officer in Approval Bureau shall ensure that all the fields of all the Reports are
filled completely. If not, the same shall be brought to the notice of the Council.

1.9 Grant of Approval

a. The Executive Committee (EC) after considering the recommendations of the Regional
Committee (RC) and views of the Approval Bureau shall take decision either to grant of approval
or otherwise. The decisions of the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.

b. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form of
Letter of Approval (LOA) or Letter of Rejection (LoR). Also, Speaking Order will be made available
on AICTE web portal in case of LOR with specific reasons for rejection of the application.

c Applicants for starting new Technical Institutions other than Government/ Government aided
Institutions whose applications are recommended for Letter of Approval (LoA) by the Executive
Committee shall be informed for the creation of Security Deposit as per APH Provisions.

i. Existing Institutions applied under Clause 1.3.5 and in existence for more than 10 years
with the respective Regulatory Bodies are exempted from the payment of Security Deposit.

ii. Applicants, whose applications (Clause 1.5.2) are recommended for starting new Technical
Institutions shall create the Security Deposit for the balance amount of the Security
Deposit created earlier, as per the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook for
the remaining period of 10 years, as applicable. No deposit is required where NOC was
already issued to the Institution for the release of the earlier FDR.

iii. The Applicant shall submit the proof for payment of the Security Deposit along with an
Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation by the concerned Regional Office, else
a penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed up to 31** May
and 31* July of the Calendar Year respectively, beyond which the approval shall be withdrawn.

iv. In case of the Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval that failed to admit the
students in the current Academic Year due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or
Non-Fulfilment of State Government/ UT requirements shall submit an Affidavit for the
same within 7 days from the date of intimation for the credit of Security Deposit in AICTE
bank account to the concerned Regional Office. Such Applicants are permitted to pay the
Security Deposit in the next Academic Year as per the above deadlines.

v. Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount in AICTE’s bank account as applicable to
the category of the Institutions indicated below:

Security Deposit applicable for Institutions under Different Programmes @ in Lakh*

SI. Programme _ Diploma/Post Diploma Under Graduate Post Graduate Diploma/Post
Graduate Degree
Minority/ Others Minority/ Others Minority/Women’s/ Others

Women’s/ Women’s/ PwBD/ J&K/Ladakh /

PwBD/ J&K/ PwBD/ J&K/ North Eastern States
Ladakh/ North Ladakh / North
Eastern States Eastern States

1 | Engineering 12 15 28 35 28 35
and Technology
2_|Planning 12 15 12 15 2 15
3 [Applied 12 15 12 15 2 15
Artsand Crafts
4 |Design 12 15 12 15 12 15
5 |Hotel
Management 12 15 12 15 12 15
and Catering
Technology
6 |MCA - - - - 2 15
7__|Management 12 15 - - 2 15

#The amount shall be double in case of private leased building.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 45 ---
d. The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years. The interest
accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities,
Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships to students, etc.

e. The Principle amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the
term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as
shall be decided on a case to case basis and/ or forfeited in case of any violation of norms,
conditions, and requirements/ Non-Performance by the Institution/ Complaints against the
Institution.

f. Validity of the Letter of Approval for the new Technical Institutions, if issued, shall be for two
Academic Years from the date of issue of Letter of Approval, only for obtaining affiliation
from the respective University/ Board and fulfilling State Government/ UT requirements for
admission in the respective Academic Year.

ALL the Applicants issued LoA for starting the new Technical Institutions shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal for Extension of Approval as specified in the Approval Process Handbook for the
next Academic Year onwards, irrespective of the admission of the students or otherwise.

NOTE: On Expiry of the Validity of Two Years, the LoA issued Stands Cancelled.

g. An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has
passed out, to verify the fulfillment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

h. The Council shall Normally not grant Conditional Approval to any Institution.

i. Applications for an existing Institution for the Closure of the Institution and starting a new
Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year rejected by Council shall be
processed for the Closure of the Programme/ Institution (as applicable)/ Extension of Approval,
as per the choice mentioned in the application following the procedure specified in Chapter
Il of the Approval Process Handbook. However, it is the responsibility of the Institutions to
inform the rejection of the Council to the concerned authorities who had given the NOC for the
Closure of the Institution in view of their application.

j. ALetter of Approval (LOA)/Letter of Rejection (LOR) with the reasons for rejection of the application
shall be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or before 30" April of the Calendar Year.
However, due to pandemic Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

k. Any Institution/ Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal
as per Clause 1.10 of this Chapter and the final decision of the Council shall be intimated
through portal on or before 30th April of the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Hon'ble
Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

I. LoA shall not be granted after 30thApril of the Calendar Year in compliance to the order dated
13.12.2012 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in CA No.9048/ 2012. However, due
to pandemic Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

NOTE: In the event of any discrepancy in the issued LOA, brought to the notice of the Council,
a Corrigendum LOA shall be issued with the approval of Competent Authority.

1.10 Appeal Procedure

a. As per the provisions laid down in Clause1.9. of this Chapter, an Institution/ Applicant, if
aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal (through
portal) once to the Council within 7 days from the date of issue of LoR.

b. The appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee. The
appeal schedule shall be notified on the Web-Portal/website.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 46 ---
c Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of Standing Appellate Committee and not
to remain absent in view of the stern time limit given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Hence,
the Applicants are instructed to be prepared with the supporting documents in proof of the
compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the Committee, even in case of short
notice.

d. The Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee and Expert Visit Committee (as applicable)
shall be placed along with the observations of the Approval Bureau, before the Standing
Appellate Committee on the date and time scheduled by AICTE. An Officer of the Council
concerned shall assist the Committee and place relevant records and documents before the
Committee and make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the meetings; however, he/
she shall not be a part of the Committee.

e. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
Attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents before
the Standing Appellate Committee.

f. The Standing Appellate Committee shall either Recommend/ Not Recommend the case to the
Council or recommend for scrutiny / Expert Visit Committee. Accordingly, Scrutiny /Expert Visit
Committee shall be conducted as per Clause1.6/1.7 of this Chapter and the reports of the same
shall be placed before another Standing Appellate Committee inviting the representatives of
the Institution along with the compliance and supporting documents for taking a final decision
as to Recommend/ Not Recommended.

g. The concerned Officer in Approval Bureau shall ensure that all the fields of all the Reports are
filled completely & in order.

h. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.

i. Applicants, whose applications are recommended for grant of approval by the Council, shall be
informed for submission of Security Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 as per Clause 1.9(c) of
this Chapter.

j. ALetter of Approval (LOA)/Letter of Rejection (LOR) with the reasons for rejection of the application
shall be issued to the Institution through Web-Portal, on or before 30" April of the Calendar Year.
However, due to pandemic Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

1.11 Appointment of Principal/Director and Faculty in Newly Approved Institution/ Programme

a. New Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval shall comply with the appointment of
Faculty/ Principal/ Director as the case may be, as per Policy regarding minimum qualifications,
pay scales etc., as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

b. Institutions shall appoint Faculty/Principal/Director, other Technical Supporting Staff and
Administrative Staff strictly in accordance with the methods and procedures of the concerned
affiliating University/ Board, State Government/ UT and Hon'ble Court directions, if any, and as
applicable in the case of selection procedures and Selection Committees.

c The information about these appointments of Faculty /Principal/Director, in the prescribed
Format shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal of AICTE.

d. An Institution shall not commence the Courses, without the appointment of all the Faculty
members and other Staff.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 47 ---
1.12 Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical Institution is given in Annexure 5
of the Approval Process Handbook.

NOTE: All the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions) the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC will be conducted in
Offline mode also. All the processing of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC will be recorded to have Transparency
and Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal is
not necessary if verified online.

+ —Incompliance of the order dated 08.11.2019 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of Indian CA No.364/ 2005, for the existing Institutions offering Courses
in Architecture Programme, approval by the Council of Architecture (CoA) is
mandatory and AICTE approval is NOT required.

+ —Incompliance of the order dated 05.03.2020 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India in Transferred Petitions (CIVIL) No 87-101 of 2014, for the
existing institutions offering courses in Pharmacy Programme, approval of
Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) is mandatory and AICTE approval is NOT
required.

+ — State Public, Private Universities and Central Universities are also not required
to take AICTE approval as per the AICTE Act. However, some of the Universities
are seeking approval of AICTE for availing the benefits of AICTE Schemes/
Initiatives as per the prevailing policies/norms. Similarly, INTERESTED
Architecture and Pharmacy Institutions may apply to AICTE for approval,
provided, they are already having valid approval of CoA and PCI, respectively
on the day of application.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 48 ---
CHAPTER-II

Existing Institutions

Grant of Approval through Online Application for the following:
+ Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

+ — Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)

+ Change of Site/ Location

+ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa

+ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

+ Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/Society/ Company operating
in the same Campus or City

+ Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake

+ Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in
Gulf Countries

+ Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
+ Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)

+ — Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course

+ Closure of the Institution

+ — Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management

+ Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction
in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)

+ Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/ Board or
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)

+ Change in the Minority Status of the Institution

+ Change in the Name of the Bank

+ Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
+ Extended EoA

2.1 Introduction

a. Institution offering Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall not admit students without prior
approval of the Council.

b. Each Institution offering Technical Programme at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under
Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall submit an
application through AICTE web portal to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of
Course(s).

c In view of the National Perspective Plan, the existing Institutions applying for New Programme/
Level/Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) in Engineering and Technology shall be permitted
in Emerging/Multidisciplinary areas also.

d. The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central,
State and Local Laws and norms of other Regulatory Body, if applicable.

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 49 ---
2.2

2.3

In case of Institutions having Lease agreement for Land, the Council shall not issue EoA from
the Year in which the Live Lease is equal to the number of years of the Course having the
maximum duration. However, if such Institutions submit the Lease extended for a further 30
years with at least 25 years of Live Lease, EoA shall be considered.

Time Schedule for Processing of Applications

a.

AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website from time to time inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and
processing thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall
be final and binding. To process any request from the Institutions regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not valid.

The submission of an application on the AICTE Web-Portal and payment of TER Charges shall
not be later than the last date as notified in the Public Notice / AICTE Website.

Submission of Application by the Promoter

2.3.1

2.3.2

Allotment of USER ID

a. If the institution has not obtained USER ID & Password previously, a unique USER ID along
with password shall be allotted on payment of $5000/- (Five Thousand Only), through the
payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal @www.aicte-india.org

b. If any existing Institution has forgotten the Password, the Institution shall apply online for
a new password. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of ¥5000/- (Five Thousand
Only) shall be made through the payment gateway on the AICTE Web-Portal. The proof of
payment and an Affidavit 1 for”Forgotten Password” shall be submitted to the concerned
Regional Office/ Uploaded on the portal. Regional Officer shall verify and make necessary
recommendations on the portal for allotment of Password to the Applicants.

The existing Institutions using their Login credentials shall enter/ edit data as required.

The application in the prescribed Format shall be submitted on AICTE Web-Portal and
a unique identification number is allotted to each application for further reference. The
status of the application shall be tracked at various stages of processing.

Seeking Approval of the Council for:
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

a.
b. — Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)

c. Change of Site/Location
d. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
e. To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

f. Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus or City

g. Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the preceding Academic
Year/ Restoration of Intake

h.  Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

i. Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
j. Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)

k. Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course

|. Closure of the Institution

m. Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management

n. Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure
of Programme(s)/Course(s)

o. Change in the Name of Institution or Affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University)

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 50 ---
2.3.3

p. Change in the Minority Status of Institution

q. Change in the Name of Bank

rt. Change in the Name/ Address of Trust/ Society/Company
s. Extended EoA

NOTE: ALL Standalone PGDM/PGCM institutions who have NOT uploaded full details of
all the students since inception of the program on AICTE web portal despite continuous
correspondence over the last three years shall NOT be allowed to apply for any of the
categories mentioned above.

Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges

a. TER Charges = in Lakh for various applications of (Diploma/ Post Diploma/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree) Institutions are as given below:

Minority
Institution /
Institution set up
in J&K/ Ladakh/
North Eastern
States / Institution
set up Exclusively
for Women/PwBD

0.10 0.25 Nil 2.0 2.0 4.0 0.25 1.0

Government/
Government
Aided Institutions
/ Central
University/State
University*

Nil Nil Nil 0.10 Nil Nil Nil Nil

All other
Institutions

0.15 0.30 Nil 2.0 2.0 5.0 0.25 1.0

Minority Institution/ Institution
setup in J&K/ Ladakh/North

Eastern States/Institution set up 20 0.75 0.40
Exclusively for Women/PwBD

Government/Government Nil Nil Nil
aided Institutions** ' ' '
All other Institutions 3.0 1.0 0.50

oe
eS

Hi
--- Page 51 ---
TER charges for EoA based on Self-Disclosure and Continuation of OCI/ FN/ Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries seats are considered for the number of Divisions and
Courses respectively of the Applied Intake. NoTER Charges shall be levied for Postgraduate
Degree Courses other than MCA and Management.

NO TER Charges shall be levied for Postgraduate Degree Courses other than MCA
and Management.

In case of affiliated Institutions in Rural areas, a concession of = 5000/- (Rupees Five
Thousand only) per Division is granted for EoA based on Self-Disclosure. The concession
is not applicable to the Institutions in Rural areas falling under Minority Institution/
Institution set up in J&K/ Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ Institution set up exclusively for
Women/ PwBD, where the concession is already given.

* NOTER Charges shall be levied, if the State Government/ UT changes the jurisdiction of
the affiliating University.

** NO TER Charges shall be levied for Government Aided Institutions (even if they are
running self-financing courses)

# If the Parent and Child Institution(s) are located in the same Campus within an aerial
distance of 1km and fulfil the Land Norms (without any relaxation for land as per
Clause 2.10.1.e), TER Charges to be paid is = 1 Lakh (Rupees One Lakh only).

NOTE:
TER Charges for Change in the Name of the Bank is $5000/-(Rupees Five Thousand only).

Above TER Charges (other than EoA based on Self-Disclosure and Continuation of OCI/
FN/Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries seats)are applicable irrespective of
number of Divisions/Courses.

TER Charges shall NOT be refunded in any case, if the application is processed and
rejected as specified in this Approval Process Handbook.

b. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (including the
Court directions) to any type of Institutions (other than Government/Government Aided),
then the Applicant has to remit = 0.5 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.

c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee has to be
conducted (inclusive of the Court directions) to any type of Institutions (other than
Government/Government Aided), the Applicant has to remit =1.0 Lakh through online as
an additional TER Charges.

d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline, failing which, the application shall not be considered for processing.

e. Only those applications submitted within the cutoff date shall be considered for
processing, subject to realization of the Payment.

f. Applications submitted under Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Diploma Level
into Degree Level/ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions/ Merger of
Institutions (under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus or
City), if rejected at the Level of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny without availing the appeal provision,
the TER Charges after a deduction of = 0.5 lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.

2.3.4 All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited are correct. Facility to edit the data is
available until the final submission of the online application.

2.3.5 AICTE Web-Portal permits the generation of Deficiency Report for the online submitted
applications.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 52 ---
2.3.6

2.3.7

2.3.8

2.3.9

2.3.10

2.3.11

2.3.12

After the final submission of the application, the data shall not be allowed for any further
editing, till the processing of application is completed. Hence, the Applicants shall exercise
utmost caution before pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.

Application should be submitted on the AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org on or before
the last date as notified in the Public Notice /AICTE Website.

If an Institution has wrongly submitted an application, the same may be represented to AICTE,
Headquarters along with the Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company (Director/principal/
Authorized person in case of government institutions), duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary
to that effect in the Format 3, within 7 days before the last date as notified in the Public Notice
for Approval process /AICTE Web-Portal.

The application shall be reopened ONE TIME to enable the Institution to rectify the same
and resubmit with necessary TER Charges along with the Penalty for Late Submission (as
applicable),with the approval of Competent Authority.

After the submission of the application, if an institution intends to revoke the application for
a specific purpose (other than Extension of Approval), the same shall be represented by the
Institution to AICTE, Headquarters along with the Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company,
duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary to that effect in the Format 3, at least within 7
days from the last date as notified in the Public Notice /AICTE Website. Such requests shall
be processed and placed before the Executive Committee for approval. The decision of the
Executive Committee shall be communicated to the Institution through the Web-Portal. If
approved, the TER Charges after a deduction of 0.25 Lakh/- shall be refunded to the Applicant
and if the Closure of the Course(s)/Programme(s)/Institution is revoked as per the approval of
the Council, the necessary TER Charges for Extension of Approval along with the Penalty for
Late Submission, as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall be paid.

f an Applicant intends to withdraw the application for Closure of the Institution/ Programme(s)/
Course(s) which is pending while processing for non-submission of documents, the same shall
be revoked on or before 10th April of the Calendar Year, only if the concerned University/
Board/ State Government/ UT gives consent to withdraw the application for Closure, else the
application shall be processed ONLY for the Closure of the Institution/ Programme(s)/ Course(s).
n case, the Closure of the Institution/ Programme(s)/ Course(s) is revoked as per the approval
of the Council, the necessary TER Charges for Extension of Approval along with the Penalty for
Late Submission, as applicable (application will be treated as late submitted), shall be paid.

An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Public Notary or an Oath
Commissioner on %100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed
& uploaded on AICTE web portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the
provisions, civil and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.

All Institutions shall upload the documents (Digitally Signed using DSC) as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook on AICTE Web-Portal. Hard Copies of the
Application/ Additional Documents NEED NOT be submitted to the Regional Office.

Applications other than Extension of Approval to be processed by the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee shall present their application and ALL original documents along with self- attested
copies before the Committee

Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company or a member belonging to these, if charge-sheeted,
Extension of Approval to such Institution shall not be withheld on the basis of charge-sheet
filed by the CBI. AICTE shall consider the grant of Extension of Approval on its merit after looking
into material collected by CBI in the investigation and shall conduct Scrutiny of documents,
Expert Visit Committee and Standing Appellate Committee as required.

Applications complete in all respects shall only be considered for processing.

The applications submitted online along with applicable processing fees (if any) shall be
processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The
Institution shall also have to adhere to the existing Central, State and Local Laws.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 53 ---
2.3.13 Institutions at random would be subject to surprise inspection for the fulfillment of the norms
of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.3.14. If any document submitted is found to be fraudulent, criminal case shall be filed against the
Director/Principal of the Institution and Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/Company.

2.4 The Institution shall be given an opportunity to submit the compliance of deficiencies (if any),
before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, to fulfil the criteria of “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-
Disclosure, for processing the application, as applicable.

2.5 Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure
2.5.1. | Requirements and Eligibility
Documents as per Appendix 17.1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
2.5.2 Procedure

a. Grant of Extension of Approval is based on Self-Disclosure of required facilities and
Infrastructure availability as submitted online on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.
org.The Council shall grant the desired approval, only after confirming that the Applicant

had fulfilled all the norms and standards specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Council shall monitor for fulfilment of all norms by the Institution and in the event of
Non-Fulfilment, the Council shall initiate penal action as per the Regulations.

c. In case of The Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval but failed to admit the
students due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State
Government/ UT requirements, the deficiency/ requirement of Faculty and infrastructural
facilities shall be calculated from the year of the admission of the students.

2.6 Introduction/ Continuation of Seats for Non Resident Indian(s)

2.6.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institutions are eligible to apply for the Introduction of NRI only after one
batch of students has passed out.

b. The existing Institution seeking approval for admitting Sons/ Daughters of Non Resident
Indian(s), Institutions shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal.

c. Five percent (5%) of seats within “Approved Intake” shall be allowed for admission under
NRI category.

d. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Report
generated.

e. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Non-Resident Indian(s)
shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.2
of the Approval Process Handbook

2.6.2 Procedure

a. Grant of Approval for admission under NRI is based on Self-Disclosure of required facilities
and Infrastructure availability as submitted online on AICTE Web-Portal.

b. In the event of non-availability of students in NRI seats, the seats shall be given to general
candidates as per merit. However, regular Fee shall be applicable to these candidates thus
admitted against vacant NRI seats.

2.6.3 Continuation of NRI Seats

The Institution shall submit an online application (request through portal) for continuation of
approval for NRI seats for each course, as a part of application of Extension of Approval, every
year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.

2.6.4 Admission and Fee

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 54 ---
Competent Authority for admission shall be the same as for regular admission and shall
fetch a list of Technical Institutions who have sought approval from the Council.

The Competent Authority for admission shall display the availability of NRI seats, course/
branch wise, in various Institutions, for information of candidates during all stages of
admission so that the students can freely exercise their informed choice. The Institutions
shall publish on their Brochure and Web site, the number of NRI seats available in the
Course(s)/Division(s).

Competent Authority for admission shall prepare a merit list of Applicants by inviting
applications from eligible NRI students and effect admission strictly on merit basis.

A letter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to
each beneficiary. Students admitted under this scheme shall not be allowed to change
Institution/ Course under any circumstances.

The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their
Websites for information to the students and other stake holders.

The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates
to be admitted under NRI seats.

2.7. Change of Site/Location

2.7.1

2.7.2

Requirements and Eligibility

a.

The existing Institution seeking approval for the Change of Site/ Location shall apply on
AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension of Approval as per norms.

The additional documents to be submitted for Change of Site/ Location shall be as per
Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process Handbook.

The Change of Site/ Location shall be allowed within the jurisdiction of the current
affiliating University/ Board. For PGDM Institutions, the Change in Site/ Location shall be
allowed within the City/Town. However, the convenience/approach ability of all stake
holders of the Institution to the new Site/ Location shall also be taken care.

Procedure

a.

The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee followed by an Expert Visit Committee. The date of
the visit shall be communicated through e-mail/ AICTE Website. It shall be necessary to
provide Built-up are as per norms required for the conduct of all the existing Programme(s)
and Course(s) at the new Site/ Location. The Expert Visit Committee shall verify the
completeness of Infrastructure ONLY to ensure that academic and other activities be
initiated at the new Site/Location.

The Equipment, Library and other movable property in the existing Institution shall be
shifted to the new Site/ Location, only after approval by the Council for Change of Site/
Location.

After shifting of the Equipment, Library and other movable property from the existing
Institution to the new Site/ Location another Expert Visit Committee shall be conducted
before the start of academic session of the current Academic Year again to verify the
availability of facilities at the new Site/Location.

The Change of Site/Location shall be effected only on receipt of final approval in respect
of new Location and approval for activities at previous Location shall cease.

On approval of new Location, all activities of the Institution shall necessarily be carried
out at newly approved Location only.

Any violation in this respect shall lead to Withdrawal of Approval and Institution shall not
be allowed to continue its activities in either of the Locations.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 55 ---
2.7.3

g.

Request for approval for partial shifting of the Programme(s) and Course(s) in the
Institution shall not be considered.

If any Institution is found to function in an unauthorized /temporary location, violating the
norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook, the Council shall take appropriate
action.

2.8 Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and Vice-Versa

2.8.1

2.8.2

Requirements and Eligibility

a.

j.

The existing Institutions shall be eligible for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma
Level and vice-versa in the same Specialization in ONE Programme only.

The Institutions which are in existence for a minimum period of 5 years ONLY are eligible.

The existing Institutions applying for Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and
vice-versa in any Programme shall have to apply for Progressive/ Complete Closure of
ALL the existing Courses including Post Graduate Course(s) in the corresponding
discipline, if any.

If the application for Conversion is being rejected, the same shall be processed for the
Closure of the Institution/issue of Extension of Approval as per the choice mentioned in
the application.

The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Diploma Level into
Degree Level and vice-versa shall be as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process
Handbook.

Merger / Addition of new Courses in Conventional / Traditional Disciplines are NOT
permitted.

The Conversion shall be permitted for all the Courses in the said Level, however, Partial
conversion of few Courses in the said Level is not permissible. In case, closest available
nomenclature does not exist in Annexure 3 or 4 of the Approval Process Handbook, then
such Course(s) shall not be permitted for Conversion.

The applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the affiliating University/Board and
their views on the same shall be forwarded to the concerned Regional Office, not later
than one week from the last date of submission of application as per the Public Notice.

In the absence of the receipt of the views from the affiliating University/ Board on the
application, the Council shall proceed for further processing as per the provisions in the
Approval Process Handbook

The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution

Procedure

a.

The existing Institution seeking approval for Diploma Level into Degree Level and
vice-versa shall apply for the Course(s) corresponding to the existing one as per
Annexure 3 or 4 of the Approval Process Handbook (as applicable) on AICTE Web-
Portal as per the norms. In case, the closest available nomenclature does not exist as per
Annexure 3 or 4 of the Approval Process Handbook, then such Course(s) shall have to be
applied for Closure.

The application for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level shall be processed
as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook (Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee
followed by an Expert Visit Committee). The date of visit shall be communicated through
e-mail/web portal.

Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level shall be processed through Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny Committee ONLY (No EVC).

It shall be necessary to provide adequate Infrastructural facilities as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook to conduct all Programme(s) and Course(s).

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 56 ---
2.8.3

e. The Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa shall be affected only
after the grant of approval by the Council and the intake shall be fixed as that of the
“Approved Intake” of the Courses.

f. If the application for Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa is not
approved, EoA to the Institution shall be issued, however, the deficiencies noted by the
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee (as applicable) shall be fulfilled before the
issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.

Applications for the Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa, rejected
by Council shall be processed for the Closure of the Programme/Institution (as applicable)/
Extension of Approval, as per the choice mentioned in the application following the procedure
specified in Chapter Il of the Approval Process Handbook. However, it is the responsibility of the
Institutions to inform the rejection of application by the Council to the concerned authorities
who had given the NOC for the Closure of the Institution in view of their application.

NOTE: Land relaxation and refund of Security Deposit in excess shall NOT be allowed for
Institutions applying for the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level. In case of
applications seeking vice-versa, the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall
have to be fulfilled

2.9 Tostart New Programme / Level in the Existing Institutions

2.9.1

Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institutions seeking approval to start new Programme/ Level shall apply on
AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension of Approval for the existing Programme(s)
and Course(s) with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval
Process Handbook. However, the Institutions shall be permitted to apply for the same
only after one batch of students passes out. Existing Institutions shall be permitted to
start programme/course(s) in Engineering and Technology in Conventional/Emerging/
Multi disciplinary areas.

b. The Institutions applying under Break in EoA /Restoration of Intake are NOT eligible to
apply.

c. The Institutions applying under this category shall not be eligible to apply for other
categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook except Extension
of Approval/ Continuation of NRI/ supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries for the existing Course(s).

d. The Institutions shall be permitted to apply ONLY for ANYONE Level (Diploma/ Under
Graduate Degree) in an existing Programme/ a new Programme, not exceeding THREE
Division(s)/ Course(s)

e. To start additional/ new Courses at Post Graduate Level, the same shall be processed
as per Clause 2.14 of the Approval Process Handbook wherever corresponding/ allied
Under Graduate Level is available. However, the Constituent Colleges of State/Central
Universities shall be permitted to start Post Graduate Level without corresponding/ allied
Under Graduate Level.

f. Building Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the Institution shall be
prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor
and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State
Government/ UT.

However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects as per the
Infrastructure requirements. Institution shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook. Common facilities shall cater the need of the total
“Approved Intake” with total Built-up area equal to the sum total of the area requirement
of each Programme(s)/Level(s).

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 57 ---
g. The total land required shall be the highest amongst the programs/levels being offered
by the Institute. However, institute should have sufficient built up area to cover all the
requirements of ALL the programs/levels conducted as per the provisions of Approval
Process Handbook.

h. Although AICTE does permit sharing of resources, the institute shall provide ample
space for play-ground (owned or hired) facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the
students either in the Campus or through arrangements with other adjacent Institutions,
Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.

i. The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms)
preferably corresponding to the Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.

j. The Institution may also seek to change in the Name of the Institution
2.9.2 Procedure

a. The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
(Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee) followed by an Expert Visit Committee as per
Clause 2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook. The date of visit shall be communicated
through e-mail.

b. If the application for the new Programme/Level is not approved, EoA of the Institution
shall be issued, however, the deficiencies noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit
Committee shall be fulfilled before the issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.

2.10 Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus or City

In view of National Education Policy 2020, to encourage multidisciplinary approach in Higher Technical
Education the earlier limit of 2 km (Aerial Distance) has been extended to City Limits.

Parent Institution - An Institution where prospective learning takes place after the Merger.

Child Institution(s) - Institution(s) from which the Courses are to be shifted to the Parent
Institution and cease to exist upon approval of merger of the Institutions.

2.10.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institutions of the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
location/ city shall be permitted to merge into a single Institution with all the facilities
at the proposed Parent Institution and/ or part/ full facilities of the Child Institution(s), if
necessary.

b. If all the required facilities are available exclusively in the Parent Institution (without
depending on the facilities of the Child Institution(s)), as the Child Institution(s) shall
be considered for Complete Closure. However, the convenience/ approachability of all
stakeholders of the Child Institution(s) to the Site/ Location of the Parent Institution shall
also be taken care of by the Institutions (including commutation).

NOTE: Intra-Day movement of Students and Faculty NOT Allowed under any circumstances
(in case of infrastructure & other facilities required by Parent institution after merger are
in multiple locations). Institutions going for such merger shall duly inform all the stake
holders regarding schedule of conduct of Programs / Courses prior to admission.

c. The Institution shall also select the Parent Institution’s PID and may seek changes in the
Name of the Institution.

d. The Built-Up area requirement and other facilities required for the entire duration of all the
Programmes /Courses shall be fulfilled in all respects and shall maintain Faculty: Student
ratio as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

e. The total Land after the Merger shall be same as the highest Land required amongst all
the Programme(s).

f. The child Institutions shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with their individual
application for Extension of Approval as per the norms, with the additional documents

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 58 ---
2.10.2

2.10.3

as per Appendix 17.4 of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the norms of the
concerned Regulatory Authorities shall also be fulfilled.

NOTE: Child Institutions shall be allowed to submit their application ONLY for EoA (No
changes will be permitted).

All or selected Courses of Child Institution(s) shall be merged with the Parent Institution.
However, the rest of the AICTE approved Courses, if any, in the Child Institution(s) shall be
considered as closed and due procedure for closure of the same shall be followed.

The Parent Institution shall have all infrastructure and other facilities to run ALL the
Courses for the entire duration of both Parent and Child Institution(s).

If Merger of Institutions is approved, the (Child) Institutions that are merged with the
(Parent) Institutions are considered as cease to exist and the liabilities, if any, arise out of
this merger for the Child Institution(s), shall solely be that of Trust/ Society/ Company/
Parent Institution ONLY.

The Principal of the Institution shall have the qualifications (satisfying AICTE norms)
preferably corresponding to the Programme having the maximum “Approved Intake”.

In case of Merger of Institutions is approved, eligible refund/ additional TER Charges may
be refunded/ collected, as applicable.

In case, merger of institutions is rejected at Scrutiny/Re-scrutiny level, refund of TER
charges shall be applicable as per Clause 1.4.2(g).

Procedure

a.

The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
with Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee followed by an Expert Visit Committee. The date of

the visit shall be communicated through e-mail/ AICTE Website.

The application shall be processed as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process Handbook
(Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee), if the Parent and Child Institution(s) are located in the
same Campus within an aerial distance of 1km and fulfil the Land (without any relaxation for
land as above, Clause 2.10.1(e)), Built-Up area requirement and Faculty: Student ratio for
the entire duration for all the Programmes as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

Affidavit 2 shall be submitted to the effect that the Land and Built-up area remain the
same before/ after the merger of the Institutions and shall not be utilized for other
purposes.

If anyone of the Institution is Women’s Institution, then the application shall be processed
first for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution by Scrutiny/ Re-
Scrutiny Committee, if found in order, then only the application shall be processed further
for Merger of Institutions following the respective procedure specified in the Approval
Process Handbook.

”

The intake shall be fixed as that of the “Approved Intake” of the Course. “Approved Intake’
for the Courses of the Institution after the merger shall be combined intake of parent and
child institutions.

If the application for merger of Institution is NOT approved, EoA of the individual
Institutions shall be issued.

The Council reserves its right to reject the application for merger of Institutions under the same
Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus, if it finds the reasons given are not
justified or Commercial or Business angle is suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.

NOTE: It shall be the responsibility of the Promoter to take approval from the other Regulatory
Bodies, (if applicable) in view of merger of the Institutions.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 59 ---
2.11 Extension of Approval of the Existing Institutions after a Break in the Preceding Academic Year(s)/
Restoration of Intake

2.11.1. Restoration of Intake under Break in EoA
2.11.1.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a The Institution seeking approval after Break in EoA (break in obtaining extension of
approval by an institution on their own in the previous year(s)) shall apply on the AICTE
Web-Portal along with the documents as per Appendix 17.1 of the Approval Process
Handbook. However, Institution not applied for EoA for SIX years consecutively shall
not be eligible to apply under Break in EoA and such Institutions shall apply as a New
Technical Institution following appropriate procedure for Closure of the Programmes/
Courses approved.

b The Institutions applying under this category shall not be permitted to apply for other
categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook except
reduction in intake.

2.11.1.2 Procedure

Institutions not applied for Extension of Approval in the preceding Academic Years shall be
considered as“Break-in-EoA” and shall be processed for Extension of Approval upon verification
of adequate Infrastructural facilities as specified in the Approval Process Handbook by an
Expert Visit Committee.

2.11.2. Restoration of Intake under punitive/penal action
2.11.2.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a The Institution seeking approval for Restoration of Intake under punitive/penal action
shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the documents as per Appendix 17.1
of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Institution not applied for Restoration
within next Academic Year shall be considered that penal action is accepted by the
Institution and willing to continue with the same reduced intake as “Approved Intake”.
Institution under “NO ADMISSION” may apply for restoration in the next Academic
Year and before completion of SIX years. Thereafter, such institution shall apply as a
New Technical Institution following appropriate procedure.

b The Institution(s) applying under this category shall not be permitted to apply for
other categories listed under Chapter II/ Ill/ V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook
except reduction in intake.

2.11.2.2 Procedure

Restoration of Intake for an Institution shall be processed upon verification of the
availability of adequate Infrastructural and other facilities as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook by Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny / Expert Visit Committee / SHC / SAC.

2.12 — Introduction/Continuation of Supernumerary Seats for Foreign Nationals/Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

2.12.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA, and
if the valid accreditation period is beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, seeking
approval for the Introduction of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall apply on AICTE
Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.5 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

b. Institutions selected for Study in India Programme by the Government of India are
eligible for introduction of FN/OCI/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries in ALL
Programmes/ Courses without Expert Visit Committee and TER Charges.

c. If the Institution is providing Fee waiver to the selected students as per their commitment
to the Government, the TER Charges for continuation of supernumerary seats for FN/OCI/

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 60 ---
Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries shall be waived. However, the Institution shall
upload on AICTE Web portal the selection letter for Study in India Programme and the
document for the Fee waiver provided to the students.

d. Institutions having Infrastructural facilities based on AICTE norms and fulfilling following
criteria shall be eligible to apply for approval for admitting students in this scheme.

e. The Institutions shall provide suitable Hostel/ Residential accommodation to the Foreign
Students/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) and Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries.
Further the Institutions shall also establish an Office with a Student Counselor to take care
of the needs of the students admitted. An Induction Programme shall be arranged for
such students to get acquainted to the Indian condition.

f. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.
g. The Institution was not under any punitive action previously by AICTE.

h. Fifteen percent (15%) supernumerary seats over and above the “Approved Intake” per
Course shall be approved by AICTE approved Institutions and University Departments, for
admitting students from Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India/ Children of Indian
Workers in the Gulf Countries. One third (1/3) of these 15% seats shall be reserved for the
Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.

i. | Any vacant seat in a given Course, out of 1/3rd seats reserved for Children of Indian
Workers in the Gulf Countries shall be reverted to the seats of 2/3rd meant for OCI/ Foreign
Nationals and vice-versa. Further, any vacant seat in the “Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries” after the last round
of the admission of the concerned State Government/ UT may be filled with NRI seats,
subject to the approval from AICTE for the NRI seats and fulfillment of requisite norms as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

j. | Apart from the above, any vacant seat in the “Approved Intake” after the last round of
the admission of the concerned State Government/ UT, may be filled with NRI/ Foreign
Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries,
subject to the approval from AICTE for the above seats and fulfillment of requisite norms
as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

2.12.2. Procedure

a. The Institution having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA with valid
accreditation period beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year, availability of adequate
Infrastructural facilities and other requirements as per the Norms of the Approval Process
Handbook shall be verified by Expert Visit Committee.

b. Foreign Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) /Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries admitted in AICTE approved Institutions through Indian Council for Cultural
Relation (ICCR or as Government of India nominee) shall be included within this ceiling

2.12.3 The Institution shall submit online application MANDATORILY FOR EACH COURSE (if required
/interested) for Continuation of approval for supernumerary seats for admitting Foreign
National/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries, as a part
of application of Extension of Approval, every year, giving details of Faculty and other facilities.

2.12.4 If any punitive action is enforced on an Institution, NRI/ OCI Children of Indian Workers in the
Gulf Countries seats shall be withdrawn.

2.12.5 Institutions admitting Foreign Nationals should ensure registration of foreign students with
concerned Foreigners Regional Registration Officer (FRRO) as well as with the local police
station about their entry and exit in India. Further the Institutions shall adhere to the prevalent
norms specified by the Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India from time to time.

2.12.6 Fees and Admission
a. The concerned State Government/ UT shall notify the tuition and other Fee for candidates
admitted under Foreign Nationals/ OCI seats. The children of Indian workers in the Gulf
Countries shall be treated at par with resident Citizens if admitted to seats reserved for
them i.e. One Third (1/3) of 15% supernumerary seats. The Fee prescribed for NRI seats
shall not be applicable to this admission.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 61 ---
b. Admission to these seats shall be made on merit basis among Applicants of these
categories

2.13 Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and Vice-Versa
2.13.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution seeking approval for the Conversion of Women's Institution into
Co-Ed Institution and vice-versa shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the Extension
of Approval as per the norms.

b. The additional documents to be submitted for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into
Co-Ed Institution and vice-versa shall be as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval Process
Handbook

c. The Institution may also seek change in the Name of the Institution
2.13.2 Procedure

a. The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee (as per Clause 1.6 of the Approval Process
Handbook) shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.3 of the Approval
Process Handbook submitted for Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution
and vice-versa.

b. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area as per the norms required to conduct all the
existing Course(s). However, all the exclusive facilities for Women only Institution shall also
be maintained.

c. If the application for the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and
vice-versa is not approved, EoA to the Institution shall be issued, however, the deficiencies
noted by the Online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall be fulfilled before the issue of
EoA for the next Academic Year.

d. The Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa shall be
affected only after the grant of approval by the Council.

2.14 Increase in Intake / Additional Course(s)

2.14.1 The existing Institutions shall expand its activities by the Addition of new/ additional Course(s)/
Divisions, provided they have a valid National Board of Accreditation (NBA) in place for following
reasons.

a. Increased demand in certain domains as per the industrial need for technical personnel.
b. To increase the utilization of Infrastructure available at the Technical Institutions.
c. Ensure quality of Technical Education being imparted.

2.14.1.1 Promotion of Indian languages in Technical Education

National Education Policy 2020 envisages the availability of Higher Technical Education in Indian
Languages at Diploma/Degree level. AICTE shall permit an addition of ONE division with 30/60
seats to the eligible and interested institutes. Institutions seeking approval shall be permitted
for Increase in intake against “Approved Intake” or in accredited courses as Supernumerary.

In addition, AICTE has been facilitating this by way of encouraging and funding academicians
to write books or translate books in Indian Languages, create MOOC and translate MOOC into
Indian Languages. Also a list of Indian author books are enlisted on AICTE website. Since these
Indian edition books are affordable, institutes are encouraged to use these books as text/
reference books.

2.14.2 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The Institution shall have valid NBA accreditation for the existing Course(s) as deemed
necessary. The Institution applied for NBA and waiting for the results of the visit is also
eligible to apply, but a valid NBA Certificate shall be produced at the time of Scrutiny.

b. NOC for additional course(s) from the affiliating University /Board /DTE.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 62 ---
2.14.3

Increase in Intake/ Additional Course in Diploma / Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Degree Level in Engineering and Technology shall be permissible in Conventional/
Emerging/Multidisciplinary Areas (Not applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).

All PG programs being specialized and Emerging in the respective engineering branches,
are permitted as Emerging/ Multidisciplinary areas. Institutions/Universities are expected
to revise the curricula regularly for being industry-relevant in line with NEP 2020.

The Institution seeking approval for Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s) shall apply
on AICTE Web-Portal along with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

Building Plan for the entire duration for all Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s) of the
Institution shall be prepared by an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/
Licensed Surveyor and shall be approved by the Competent Authority as designated by
concerned State Government/ UT.

However, buildings for the First Year should be completed in all respects as per the
Infrastructure requirements. Institution shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook. Common facilities shall cater the need of the total
“Approved Intake” with total Built-up area equal to the sum total of the area requirement
of each Increase in Intake/Additional Course(s).

No punitive action is pending against the Institution or FIR is filed by CBI or any other
investigative agency.

Action taken on those Institutions based on the Chapter VIII for the non-fulfillment of the
norms specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall not be eligible for Increase in
Intake/ Additional Course(s), even if the Course(s) are having valid NBA accreditation.

Institutions shall be eligible for new Course(s)/expansion of existing Course(s),equal to the
number of valid NBA accredited Course(s), limited to a maximum of FOUR within the definition
of Division/ Programme/ Level, subject to the following conditions

a.

A maximum of two Divisions shall be allowed to be added in the existing valid NBA
accredited Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Course(s), subject to the condition
that total number of Divisions after expansion per Course shall not exceed the “Maximum
Intake Allowed” as specified in Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook.

NOTE: NBA validity of one accredited course can be used for increase in intake of other
non-accredited course. The increase in intake is allowed in Conventional/Emerging/
Multidisciplinary Area courses. (Not applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).

New Diploma/ Under Graduate Degree Course(s) in the same Programme with only ONE
Division shall be allowed at the respective Level. However, New Post Graduate Course(s)
in the same Programme with ONLY ONE Division shall be allowed in specializations where
corresponding or relevant Under Graduate Degree Course(s) is accredited (except MCA
and Management)

Institutions with any accredited Course shall be permitted to utilize the benefit of
accreditation ONLY ONCE for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s) etc. (Not
applicable for Clause 2.14.1.1).

If an Institution is having more than FOUR accredited Courses, the accredited Course(s)
above FOUR shall be utilized for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s) in the
subsequent years subject to the validity of accreditation.

Institution getting approval for new Course(s) in a particular Academic Year shall also be
considered for grant of NRI/ OCI/ FN/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries,
subject to fulfilment of norms of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the institutes
need to apply for the same on portal for new courses(s) also.

NBA awards accreditation for either 3 or 6 years. An institution having a valid NBA
accreditation shall utilize for an increase in the Intake/ Introduction of a new Course ONLY
ONCE within a span of 6 years.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 63 ---
However, institutes which had accreditation for 3 years, even if the accreditation is
renewed for another 3 years, shall take benefit of introducing a new course or increased
division only once during the 6 years.

g. No increase in the Intake shall be given to Institutions where FIR/ CBI/ CVC/ any other
investigation agency/ Anti-Ragging/ Punitive actions are initiated by AICTE for any
violation in the norms and standards where inquiries are pending. Such Applications of
Institutions shall be processed through a Standing Hearing Committee and the Report
shall be placed before the Executive Committee for further processing of issuance of
approval or rejection.

2.14.4 For existing Institutions not having NBA accreditation

a. The existing Institutions having total “Approved Intake” equal to/less than the
“Maximum Intake Allowed"/Institutions not eligible to apply for NBA accreditation,
shall be permitted to increase (without NBA accreditation) in intake (Conventional/
Emerging/ Multidisciplinary area courses) in the same Level in the same Programme
(Diploma/ Under Graduate/ MCA/ Management) upto the “Maximum Intake Allowed”
in each Programme as that of a new Technical Institution, as per Appendix 3
of the Approval Process Handbook, subject to “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure
on AICTE Web- Portal.

b. The existing Institutions having total “Approved Intake” exceeding the “Maximum Intake
Allowed” seeking for approval for Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) (without NBA
accreditation) in the same Level in the same Programme (Diploma/Under Graduate/MCA/
Management) shall have to apply for the Reduction of Course(s)as per the Procedure
and shall apply for increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) in lieu of the same, without
exceeding the total “Approved Intake” as well as the number of Courses/ Divisions as
specified in Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook, subject to “Nil Deficiency”
based on Self-Disclosure on AICTE Web-Portal. Number of New Courses/ increase in
intake in Conventional / Emerging / Multidisciplinary area allowed, shall be restricted
to FOUR (in terms of Divisions) per Programme/ Level (Diploma / Under Graduate /
MCA / Management). New Course shall be allowed ONLY in case of more than 50% overall
Enrolment in last year at respective level /programme.

However, Reduction in “Core branches” (Agriculture Engineering, Automobile Engineering,
Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering,
Electronics Engineering, Food Technology, Industrial Engineering, Instrumentation,
Mechanical Engineering, Metallurgy, Mining Engineering and Textile Engineering) shall
be allowed to a maximum of 50% of previously “Approved Intake”.

c. Under any circumstances, new Post Graduate Degree Course(s) (except MCA and
Management) shall NOT be permitted in the above Clauses (a) and (b).

d. NBA accredits the Courses in Engineering and Technology, Pharmacy, Hotel Management
and Catering Technology, Architecture, MCA and Management Programmes.

e. NBA has not started accreditation of courses in Applied Arts and Crafts and Design and
hence increase in “Intake” in these programmes upto the maximum permissible limit shall
NOT require accreditation.

f. The Institutions offering the Courses in Applied Arts and Crafts and Design shall be eligible
to apply for new Course(s) at the Post Graduate Level only after two batches of students
pass out and the same shall be permitted for a maximum of FIVE Courses/ Divisions, subject
to “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure on AICTE Web-Portal. However, for every Post
Graduate Course, there should be at least one Professor with Ph.D. qualification. In case of
non-availability of qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.

NOTE: As and when accreditation for the above Courses is started by the NBA, such
Institutions who have been approved by AICTE to run Course(s) at the Post Graduate Level
shall obtain NBA accreditation within two years.

g. Existing Post Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology shall be permitted to
convert to courses in Emerging/Multidisciplinary Areas for the same “Approved intake”

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 64 ---
within the Major Discipline specified in Annexure 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.

h. An Expert Visit Committee shall be conducted, any time before the first batch of students has
passed out, to verify the fulfilment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

i. In all the above cases, the Institution shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the
additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.14.5 Procedure

a. Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the
Approval Process Handbook submitted for increase in the Intake/ additional Course(s).

b. An appeal shall be allowed for submitting NBA/ UGC Autonomy Certificate, if it was not
issued by the NBA/ UGC at the time of the Scrutiny.

2.14.6 Institutions having an “Approved Intake” less than a Divisions in any of the Course(s) as
prescribed by the Council may apply for Intake of full Division size themselves (within the
“approved /maximum allowed intake”) and shall maintain Faculty: Student ratio accordingly,
without NBA accreditation/ NOC from affiliating University / Board/ State Government/ UT;
subject to “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure in AICTE Web-Portal. However, this is NOT
applicable in case of Institutions under penal action

NOTE: Affiliation with two different Universities for the same Technical programme/Courses
shall NOT be permitted

2.14.7 Introduction / Continuation of specialized courses like MBA/PGDM (IEV) will be processed as
per the provisions mentioned in Annexure 14

2.15 Introduction of Integrated /Dual Degree Course

2.15.1 In respect of Integrated / Dual Degree Course(s), UGC norms shall be applicable, as per Section
4 of PART Ill of UGC Gazette Notification, 2014 and amended from time to time.

a. Five Years Integrated Degree in Engineering and Technology leading to Master of
Technology (M.Tech.), Nomenclature shall be as per Major Disciplines of Engineering and
Technology given in Annexure 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. Five Years Integrated Degree in Planning leading to Master of Planning.

c. Five Years Integrated Degree in Computer Applications leading to Master of Computer
Application.

d. Five Years Integrated Degree in Management leading to Master of Business Administration
(MBA).

e. Five years Integrated Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology leads to a
Master in Hotel Management and Catering Technology

2.15.2 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institutions where Course(s) in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/ Hotel
Management and Catering Technology/ MCA/ Management Programme are already
in existence shall be eligible to apply on AICTE Web-Portal for approval of respective
Integrated Degree. It is mandatory for the existing Engineering and Technology/Planning/
Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA/ Management Course to be accredited
by NBA to start the respective Integrated Degree Course.

1

b. Approval shall be considered only to those Institutions where there is “Nil Deficiency”
based on Self-Disclosure & Not eligible for the Introduction of NRI/ OCI/ FN/ Children of
Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries.

c. Collaboration and Twinning Programme shall NOT be permitted for these Course(s).

d. Applicants shall upload relevant documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval
Process Handbook on AICTE Web portal.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 65 ---
e. University affiliation for these Course(s) shall be necessary before effecting admission.

f. | Only one Division of 60 students (40 students in case of Planning) shall be approved for
Institutions applying for Integrated Degree in Engineering and Technology/ Planning/
Management/ MCA where University affiliated Course(s) in Engineering and Technology/
Planning/ Management/ MCA Programme respectively are already in existence.

g. Incase of Hotel Management and Catering Technology, approval shall be given for only
60 students within “Approved Intake” for Institutions applying for Five Years Integrated
Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology. However, this Intake shall not be
additional Intake. The approval shall be for selecting 60 students amongst the students
already admitted in the Institution to form a batch for this Course.

2.15.3 Procedure

a. The institute has to apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per the
Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6
of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for the addition of respective Integrated
Degree Course.

2.16 Closure of Institution
2.16.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution seeking for Progressive Closure or Complete Closure shall apply
on AICTE Web-Portal as per norms.

b. There shall be NO TER Charges to apply for closure.

c. Incase of Progressive Closure, Closure at the First Year Level shall be allowed in the current
Academic Year and the subsequent years of working shall be closed at the end of each
Academic Year progressively. However, final Closure order shall be issued after completion
of the Programme(s) and submission of Affidavit 4 by the Institution.

d. Incase of Complete Closure, the Institution shall be closed completely in one Instance.

e. Progressive Closure or Complete Closure is subject to no pending Court case filed against
the Institution by AICTE and no Charge sheet filed against the Institution.

f. The Institutions shall not be eligible to apply to other categories listed under Chapter II/
III/V/ VI of the Approval Process Handbook.

g. The additional documents to be submitted for Closure of the Institution shall be as per
Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook

h. For Closure of PGCM/ PGDM Institution, NOC from affiliating University/ Board/ State
Government/ UT is NOT applicable.

2.16.2 Procedure

a. The institute has to apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per the
Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix 17.9 of
the Approval Process Handbook.

c. The Closure of the Institution shall be affected only on receipt of approval by the Council.

2.16.3 Applications of existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the Institution, and if such
application is not approved by the Council due to certain deficiencies; the Institution shall be given
Extension of Approval with ZERO Intake for the current Academic Year. However, the Institution
shall not be eligible for any refund of TER Charges. Such Institutions shall submit all relevant
documents after all the students have passed out (or) redistributed to near by AICTE approved
Institutions through the affiliating University/ Board and seek official Closure of the Institution.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 66 ---
2.16.4 The application for the Closure of the Institution shall be valid for the duration of the respective

Programme offered by the Institution within which the Institution should submit the required
mandatory documents. Else, AICTE may close the Institution with the intimation to the affiliating
University/Board and the State Government/UT and shall issue a Public Notice regarding the
same. In case of such Institutions where Security Deposits are to be released, a penalty of 10%
of the value of the Security Deposit shall be imposed before the release of Security Deposit.

2.17 Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management (FPM)

a.

2.17.1

The existing Institutions are eligible to apply for the Introduction of Fellow Programme in
Management after one batch of students pass out.

The approval shall be granted for the complete duration of the Fellow Programme in
Management.

The minimum duration of the Course shall be 3 years, but shall not exceed 5 years. However,
in exceptional circumstances beyond 5 years, the student shall have to re-register and has to
complete within the extended period of 2 years.

Requirements and Eligibility

a. Institutions where Course(s) in Management Programme (MBA/MMS/PGDM) are already
in existence shall be eligible to apply for approval of Fellow Programme in Management.
It is mandatory for the existing Management Course (as applicable) to be accredited by
NBA to start Fellow Programme in Management.

b. The Institution should have a valid accreditation by NBA.

c. The existing Institution seeking approval for Introduction of Fellow Programme in
Management shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal.

d. The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Report
generated.

e. Since inception, the Institution should have been free from serious Complaints regarding
the CBl investigation, ragging, Non-Payment of dues to Council and other punitive actions.

f. The Institution should have the required number of Full Time Faculty members as per
AICTE norms for offering Fellow Programme in MBA/ MMS/ PGDM Programme.

g. The Institutions should have at least 50% and 25% of the Full Time Faculty members
with Ph.D// Fellow from AICTE approved Institutions/ AIU recognized University/ reputed
University from abroad /IIM, if the Institutions apply for 20 seats and 10 seats respectively.
These Faculty members should have at least two papers published in refereed indexed cited
International/ National Journals in the last 3 years. Each Professor and Associate Professor
shall not guide more than FOUR and TWO research scholars respectively at a time.

h. The Institution should have subscribed Journals in Business Management area of
Organizational Behaviour/ Human Resource, Finance and Accounts, Marketing,
Operations, IT Systems, Economics, etc.

2.17.2. Procedure

a. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Fellow Programme shall
apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Introduction of Fellow
Programme in Management.

c. The eligible Institution shall be allotted a maximum of 20 seats for Fellow Programme in
Management. However, the Institution may apply for 10 seats also.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 67 ---
d.

If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution
shall have the right to appeal as per Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.17.3 Student's eligibility, procedure for admission and conduct of the Programme shall be as per
details given in Appendix 20 of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.17.4 The Institution shall submit an application for Continuation of approval for Fellow Programme
in Management as a part of application of Extension of Approval, every year, giving details of
Faculty and other facilities.

2.18 Change in the Name of the Course(s)/Merger of the Course(s)/Reduction in Intake/Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)

2.18.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a.

The existing Institutions seeking approval for Change in the Name of the Course(s) (Refer
Annexure 6 or 7 of the Approval Process Handbook)/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme/ Course shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as
per Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Reduction of courses shall be permitted up to 50% of “Approved Intake”. However, in case
of closure of course the institution shall not be permitted for an increase in intake/New
Course against such proposed closure.

Change in the name of the Course is permissible ONLY in case ofthe mentioned
nomenclature is not offered by the affiliating university/body as per the guidelines given
in Annexure 6 or 7 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Merger of certain Course(s) in Engineering and Technology in Under Graduate Degree
and Diploma Course(s) is permitted as per the guidelines given in Annexure 6 or 7 of the
Approval Process Handbook as well as different specializations of MBA is permitted, so
that the Intake after merger shall be equal to the sum total of the individual Course(s) and
Divisions, provided the Faculty student ratio be maintained. Partial merger of Divisions is
NOT permissible. For example, if an Institution offering Courses such as Computer Science
and Engineering and Software Engineering, both the Courses shall be merged EITHER to
Computer Science and Engineering or Software Engineering.

Institutions may apply for reduction in Intake in any of the Course(s) within a Division (non-
zero) by themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain Faculty: Student ratio accordingly
without NOC from affiliating University/Board/State Government/UT and therestoration
shall be permitted within a Division without NBA. Institutions may apply for restoration
to the same level by themselves on the AICTE Web-Portal. However, such restoration shall
not exceed the “Approved Intake” which was prior to such reduction.

Illustration for Reduction / Restoration in Intake

No. of Divisions Approved Intake Permissible Reduction in Permissible Intake for
Intake Restoration
1 60 30 60
2 120 90 120
2 120 60 60
3 180 150 180
3 180 120 120

No. of Divisions

Approved Intake Permissible Reduction in Permissible Intake for
for Post Graduate Intake Restoration

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

AICTE
--- Page 68 ---
2.18.2 Procedure

a. The Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.9 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Name
of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/
Course(s), as applicable.

b. Applications of the existing Institutions which have applied for Closure of the
Programme(s)/ Course(s), and if such application is not approved by the Council due
to certain deficiencies, the Institution shall be given Extension of Approval with ZERO
Intake in such Courses for the current Academic Year . However, the Institution shall not
be eligible for any refund of TER Charges.

The application for the Closure of the Programme(s)/ Course(s) shall be valid for the
duration of the respective Course offered by the Institution within which the Institution
should submit the required mandatory documents. Else, AICTE shall initiate appropriate
action to close the Programme(s)/ Course(s).

2.19 Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/Board or Type of Institution
Institution(s) converted into a University.

2.19.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution seeking approval for a Change in the Name of the Institution
or affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a
University) shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the relevant documents as per
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. — Institutions applying for Change in the Name of the Institution shall follow the conditions
specified in Clauses 1.5.4 and 1.5.5 of the Approval Process Handbook

c. The Applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the affiliating University/Board
and their views on the same shall be forwarded to the concerned Regional Office, within
one month from the date of receipt of the application.

In the absence of the receipt of the views of the affiliating University/ Board on the
application, the Council shall proceed for further processing as per the provisions of
Approval Process Handbook.

d. _ Institution(s) of the sameTrust/Society/ Company applying for Change of Type of Institution
(Institution(s) converted into a University) shall apply separately for EoA based on Self-
Disclosure/ any other categories mentioned in Chapter II/ Ill and pay the TER Charges, as
applicable. The Institution may also seek for Change in the Name of the Institution.

2.19.2 Procedure

a. The institute shall apply through the AICTE Web portal with other documents as per the
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.11 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Name of
the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted
into a University), as applicable. However, in the application submitted for Change of Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University), if the Institution(s) applying for
Additional Intake than the “Approved Intake’, the requirements, eligibility and procedure
shall be as per the concerned Clauses of Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook

2.20 Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
2.20.1 Requirements and Eligibility

The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Minority status of the Institution
shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal along with the relevant documents as per Appendix
17.10 of the Approval Process Handbook.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 69 ---
2.20.2 Procedure

a. The online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17.10 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Minority
status of the Institution.

b. The Institution may also seek for Change in the Name of the Institution.

c. The Change in the Minority status of the Institution shall be effected only after the grant
of approval by the Council.

d. All the benefits/facilities applicable for the Minority institutions (converted from Non-
Minority to Minority) shall come in to force ONLY from the subsequent academic year.

NOTE: The ONLINE procedure shall remain same for change in Minority Status (Minority
to Non-Minority or Non-Minority to Minority) except for the documents to be produced
as mentioned in Appendix 17.10 of Approval Process Handbook

2.20.3. Refund of TER Charges/ Security Deposit in excess shall NOT be allowed for Institutions applying
for the Change in the Minority status of their Institution (Non-Minority to Minority).

2.21. Change in the Name of the Bank
2.21.1. Requirement and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Name of the Bank shall apply
on the AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.12 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

b. The Change in the Bank shall be applicable, only if it is a Scheduled Bank.
c. Merger of the banks (as per Government notification)
2.21.2 Procedure

The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as per Appendix
17.12 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Change in the Name of the Bank.

No Objection Certificates (NOC) from previous/old bank.

In case of merger of banks, NOC/Certificate from the bank to the effect that two or more banks
are merged subject to government notification.

2.22 Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company
2.22.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The existing Institution seeking approval for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/
Society/ Company including the merger of the Trusts/Societies/Companies shall apply
on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per Appendix 17.13 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

b. The change shall be permitted only for those Trusts/ Societies/ Companies having the
same common objects of education, etc. and either of which have not been disqualified
by the AICTE/ Court of Law/ any Statutory Body in the past.

c. Incase of any dispute among the members of merged Trusts/ Societies/ Companies is of
such nature that it would affect the standard of the Institution, then AICTE shall withhold
the approval as long as it may deem fit.

d. Further, AICTE shall have the right to /ien over the FDR till such time dispute among Trustees
or members is not settled by an Arbitrator or the Court of competent jurisdiction as
contemplated in the Trust/Society/Company document, by virtue of which amalgamation
took place.

e. ATrust/Society may create a new Company to hold their assets, and once the transferred
of assets is complete, the Trust/Society may be dissolved and the ownership may be
transferred to the company. Such viability shall vary depending on the jurisdiction and
context.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 70 ---
2.22.2 Procedure

The procedure as applicable for new institution defined under the Clause 1.6 shall be followed
for Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company

2.22.3. The Council reserves its right to reject the application for Change in the Name/Address of the
Trust/Society/ Company if it finds the reasons given are not justified or commercial or business
angle is suspected, or to defeat the provisions of any Law.

Extended EoA

2.23.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a.

Each Institution offering Technical Programme shall submit an application to the Council,
every year for Extension of Approval of Course(s) offered by the Institution. However,

In case of Institutions having at least 50% of eligible Course(s) accredited by NBA, and if
the valid accreditation period is beyond 10" April of the next Calendar Year, the period of
approval for such Institutions for the existing Course(s) shall be for a minimum period of
THREE years or for the Academic Year up to which the NBA accreditation is valid, whichever
is more.

(OR)

In case of Institutions having Academic Autonomous status given by UGC and conferred by
the affiliating University or Graded Autonomy given by AICTE to Standalone Institutions,
and if the live Autonomy period is valid beyond 10" April of the next Calendar Year, the
period of approval for such Institutions for the existing Course(s) shall be for a minimum
period of THREE years or for the Academic Year up to which the Autonomy is valid,
whichever is more.

The Institution seeking approval for Extended EoA shall apply on the AICTE Web-Portal
along with the additional documents as per Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process
Handbook.

The Institution shall have “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Deficiency
Report generated through Web-Portal.

No punitive action shall be pending against the Institution or FIR filed by CBI or any other
investigative agency.

2.23.2 Procedure

a.

The Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional document as per
Appendix 17.6 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Extended EoA.

Institutions approved for extended EoA are waived from paying TER Charges for Extension
of Approval (EoA) ONLY for the extended years for the existing Programme(s) and Course(s)
at the time of issue of Extended EoA. However, such Institutions are required to submit
the application for EoA and maintain ALL the norms and standards as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. In the subsequent years, if the Institution intends to apply
for any other Categories mentioned in Chapter II (for changes in Approval status), the
corresponding TER Charges as per Approval Process Handbook shall be applicable.

The Council shall monitor for fulfilment of all norms by the Institution and in the event of
Non-Fulfilment, the Council shall initiate penal action as per Regulations and the extended
approval shall be withdrawn. In such eventuality, the Institution needs to apply afresh and
remit the TER Charges in the subsequent years.

NOTE: Institutions under extended EoA period shall apply for extension of approval
annually and provide the data on AICTE portal as required & applicable.

2.24 Evaluation of the Application by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee

a. The applications submitted under this Chapter shall be evaluated by a Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee constituted as per Appendix 13.5 ofthe Approval Process Handbookby the Regional

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 71 ---
Officer by the selection of members through the automated selection process provided on
AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable
to attend or refuses or incapacitated to take part in the Committee, then Regional Officer with
prior or post-facto approval of the Competent Authority, AICTE, shall opt to choose another
expert from the approved panel of the experts manually. Under extraordinary circumstances,
the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall also be constituted manually by the Regional Officer
with prior approval of the Chairman.

The date and time for Scrutiny Committee shall be informed by the concerned Regional Office.

The concerned Regional Officer or an Officer of the Council shall assist the Committee and place
relevant records and documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for
the conduct of the meetings; however, he/ she shall not be part of the Committee.

Two representatives of the Applicant(Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with
Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the supporting documents before the
Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee.

Applicants shall present their application and ALL original documents along with self- attested
copies as per Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook, before the Scrutiny Committee.
Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny schedule and NOT to remain absent at the
time of Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny.

The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the documents submitted/presented by the Applicant as
mentioned above and shall countersign all the documents that are accepted (if conducted Offline).

Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant through the Web-Portal.

Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny shall be
eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by the concerned
Regional Office.

The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify only the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
Committee as per the norms and standards and shall counter sign all the documents that are
accepted.

The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee Report are filled completely.

The scanning and uploading of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee Report shall be done by
the concerned Regional Office.

Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee shall be processed further to incorporate the necessary changes in the issue of
Extension of Approval.

The attested copies of original documents shall be retained by the Regional Office in case of
offline Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny

2.25 Evaluation of the Application by the Expert Visit Committee

a.

The Expert Visit Committee shall be constituted as per Appendix 13.6 of the Approval Process
Handbook by the Regional Officer by the selection of members through the automated
selection process provided in AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member of an Expert Visit
Committee is unable to attend the scheduled visit or refuses or incapacitated to take part in
such scheduled visit, then Regional Officer with prior or post-facto approval of the Competent
Authority, AICTE, shall opt to choose another expert from the approved panel of the experts
manually. Under extraordinary circumstances, the Expert Visit Committee shall also be
constituted manually by the Regional Officer with prior approval of the Chairman. The Expert
Visit Committee shall verify physically the Infrastructural facilities of the Applicant Institution.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 72 ---
ExpertVisit Committee wherever applicable, shall verify actual availability of Faculty, Equipment,
Computers, Software, Internet, Printers, Book Titles, Book Volumes and subscription of National
and International Journal set. As specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Further, Expert
Visit Committee members should interact with students and Faculty members, in the absence
of Institution authorities. The Expert Visit Committee shall also verify the facts relating to
Complaints, if forwarded by the Regional Office and give specific remarks in the Report. Experts
shall carry the Identity Card of their Organization.

Additional experts, if required, may be co-opted in any of the Committee for processing of
applications, Complaints, etc.

The concerned Regional Officer shall make necessary arrangements for the conduct of the
Expert Visit Committee; however, he/ she shall not be a part of the Committee.

The Expert Visit Committee shall have access to the Report of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny
Committee, if applicable.

The Applicant shall arrange for Video recording at his/ her own expense with the date and time
of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit Committee and shall hand over the same to the
Committee which shall form a part of the Expert Visit Committee Report.

In case of online Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall prepare a video showcasing all
the infrastructural facilities for not less than 30 minutes and shall upload the same in YouTube
privately and share the link in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as
mentioned in Appendix 16.2 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.

In case of offline Expert Visit Committee, the institution shall arrange for Video recording
(institution expense) with the date and time of the entire proceedings of the Expert Visit
Committee. The institution shall upload the same in YouTube privately and share the link
in the web portal. Also, Attested Copies of documents (as applicable) as mentioned in
Appendix 16.2 of the Approval Process Handbook need to be uploaded on portal.

NOTE: The video recording with briefing by one of the Experts for not less than 30 minutes shall
cover the entry and exit of the Committee with time ,the Building Plan approved and signed
by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee, GPS Coordinates at the entrance of the main Building,
Class rooms, Laboratories, Workshops, Office Room, Barrier free environment facilities such as
ramp/ lift/ toilets, Library, Computer Centre, meeting with Students and Faculty members (in
case of existing Institutions), in addition to the recording of other details. The Institute shall
also arrange Laptop/Desktop with Internet facility, Scanner and Printer to the Expert Visit
Committee (only in offline mode)

Video recording (not less than 30 minutes) should be uploaded in YouTube and URL link should
be entered in the AICTE web portal.

The Expert Visit Committee shall submit the following to the Regional Office (Only if conducted
in offline mode):

1. _ Its visit Report in the prescribed format.

2. Attested Copies of all documents (as applicable) as mentioned in Appendix 17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

3. Video recording of the Expert Visit Committee during visit.

4. Attendance sheet duly signed/ digitally authenticated by the members of the Expert Visit
Committee and representatives of Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company present during the visit.

5. The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Expert Visit Committee
Report are filled completely.

6. The scanning and uploading of the Expert Visit Committee Report including the Video
recording shall be done by the concerned Regional Office.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 73 ---
k. The report of the Expert Visit Committee/Show Cause notice, if issued shall be placed before
the Standing Hearing Committee. The schedule of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be
notified on the Web-Portal.

2.26 Verification of Compliance through Standing Hearing Committee

a. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting
documents before the Standing Hearing Committee.

b. The recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for approval. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded in the
Web-Portal by a detailed Speaking Order.

c If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall
have the right to appeal once as per Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.27. Appeal Procedure

a. As per the provision laid down in Clause 2.26 (c) of this Chapter, an Institution/ Applicant, if
aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee shall have the right to appeal once to
the Council within 7 days from the date of uploading of the decision.

b. The Appeal of the Institution shall be considered by the Standing Appellate Committee. The
appeal schedule shall be notified on the Web-Portal.

c Applicants should adhere to the given schedule of Standing Appellate Committee and not
to remain absent in view of the stern time limit given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Hence,
the Applicants are instructed to be prepared with the supporting documents in proof of the
compliance of deficiencies and present the same to the Committee, even in case of short
notice.

d. The Report of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed along with the observations of
the Approval Bureau, if any, before the Standing Appellate Committee on the date and time
scheduled by AICTE. An Officer of the Council concerned shall assist the Committee and place
relevant records and documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for
the conduct of the meetings; however, he/ she shall not be a part of the Committee.

e. Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/Society/Company or
Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with Self-
attested Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting
documents before the Standing Appellate Committee.

f. The concerned Officer in Approval Bureau shall ensure that all the fields of all the Reports are
filled completely.

g. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.

2.28 Grant of Approval

2.28.1 The applications submitted under Clause 2.3.2 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be
processed as per the procedure specified in the Approval Process Handbook. The consolidated
list of all the Institutions with the “Approved Intake” shall be placed by the Approval Bureau
before the Executive Committee/ Council for the grant of Extension of Approval as applicable
for the Technical Institutions to continue to conduct Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).
The decisions taken by the Executive Committee are ratified by the Council.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 74 ---
2.28.2

2.28.3

2.28.4

2.28.5

2.28.6

The same shall be notified on the Web-Portal. Further the Institution shall download the
Extension of the approval letter along with “Approved Intake” through the Institution login.

If deficiencies are noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee for the applications for Change
of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ to start new Programme/
Level/ Merger of the Institutions, the same shall be placed before the Regional Committee for
further processing. The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Regional
Committee Report are filled completely. The recommendations of the Regional Committee shall
be placed before the Executive Committee for approval or otherwise. An Institution/ Applicant,
if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal as per Clause 2.27 of
this Chapter and the final decision of the Council shall be uploaded on or before 30" April of
the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Hon’ble Supreme Court has permitted up to
July 30°, 2022.

Applications for Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice versa/Conversion of
Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa/ to start new Programme/ Level in
the existing Institutions, if rejected by Council shall be processed for Extension of Approval.
However, the deficiencies noted by the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee shall be
fulfilled before the issue of EoA for the next Academic Year.

Applicants, whose applications are recommended for the Conversion of Diploma
Level into Degree Level/ Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution/ Closing
one Programme and starting another Programme shall create the Security Deposit for
the balance amount of the Security Deposit created earlier, as per the requirements
of the Approval Process Handbook for the remaining period of 10 years, as applicable.
No deposit is required where NOC was already issued to the Institution for the release of the
earlier FDR.

Applicants for starting new Programme/ Level (except Government/ Government aided
Institutions) whose applications are recommended for Approval by the Executive Committee
shall be informed for the creation of Security Deposit.

Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount to AICTE as applicable as per Clause1.9(c) of
the Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall submit the payment proof of the Security
Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation to the concerned
Regional Office, else a penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security Deposit shall be
imposed up to 31* May and 31* July of the Calendar Year respectively, beyond which the
approval shall be withdrawn.

The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years.
The interest accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional
Development activities, Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships
to students, etc.

The Principal amount shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of the
term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period as shall
be decided on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any violation of norms, conditions,
and requirements/Non-Performance by the Institution/Complaints against the Institution.

Allapprovals shall be uploaded by 30" April ofthe Calendar Year and the detailed speaking orders
(incaseofreductioninintake, NoAdmission, etc.) shallbeuploadedintheWeb-Portalnotlaterthan
15' May of the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Hon’ble Supreme Court has permitted
up to July 30", 2022.

Extension of Approval shall not be granted after 30" April of the Calendar Year in compliance
to the order dated 13.12.2012 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Indian CA No.9048/
2012. However, due to pandemic Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July
30", 2022.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 75 ---
2.28.7 Institutional information shall be updated on the AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for
downloading the Extension of Approval letter.

2.28.8 Student's eligibility for admission shall be as per Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.28.9 Institutions shall follow the Academic Calendar as per Appendix 19 of the Approval Process
Handbook.

2.28.10 Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal before 30" September of the
Calendar Year.

2.29 Submission of applications (All the Institutions need to submit application as per the schedule
mentioned in Public Notice / AICTE Web portal)

. The applications eligible to submit “Year round” shall also make online payment of the TER
Charges as per the Approval Process Handbook.

Particulars (Category-1) Processing Period of Application
Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s) As per Public Notice Period
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa As per Public Notice Period
Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board As per Public Notice Period
or Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)
To start new Programme Level in the existing Institutions As per Public Notice Period
Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company As per Public Notice Period
operating in the same Campus / City
Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the As per Public Notice Period
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake
Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign As per Public Notice Period

Nationals/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers
in Gulf Countries.

Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) As per Public Notice Period
Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management As per Public Notice Period
Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake As per Public Notice Period
Introduction/ Continuation of Collaboration and Twinning As per Public Notice Period
Programme

Online Learning / Open and Distance Learning courses As per Public Notice Period

NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications in above categories shall be as per Public Notice (Will
have specified deadline for the submission of application).

Particulars (Category - 2) Processing Period of Application

Change of Site/ Location Year round
Closure of the Institution Year round
Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa Year round
Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s) Year round
Change in the Minority Status of the Institution Year round
Change in the Name of the Bank Year round
Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company Year round
Extended EoA Year round

NOTE: Both submission & Processing of applications (including processing fee / TER charges as
applicable) in above categories shall be done Year Round.

. The applications submitted after the cut-off date mentioned in the Public Notice shall not
be processed during the current Academic Year, but shall be processed for the successive
Academic Year only.

. Shifting of the Campus in case of “Change of Site/ Location” shall be done only during
vacation time.

2.30 No Institution shall offer Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) without approval of the Council.
If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes (Except Architecture and Pharmacy) without

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 76 ---
2.31

2.32
2.33

the approval of the Council, it shall be declared as unapproved Institution and necessary punitive action
shall be initiated as per Chapter VIII of the Approval Process Handbook.

2.30.1

2.30.2

2.30.3

2.30.4

The Council shall maintain a list of unapproved Institutions based on the information received
and shall also inform the general public about the same from time to time

a. Provided that any Technical Institution, which has already started without following
AICTE approval procedure, wishes to submit an application/proposal shall be considered
as a new Technical Institution. For such purpose, it shall apply as per the provisions of
Chapter | of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. The legal date of starting of the Institution shall be from the date of issue of the Letter of
Approval from AICTE.

c. Students, who are admitted PRIOR TO APPROVAL by the Council, shall not have any right
to re-admission and shall have to fulfil all the requirements for admission as prescribed by
the Competent Authority for admission.

The Institutions conducting Course(s)/Programme(s) in Technical Education, in temporary
location or at location not approved by the Council shall be liable for action for Closure and
other appropriate action as per Regulations against defaulting Trust/ Society/ Company/
associated Individuals as the case maybe.

The Council shall inform respective State Government/ UT to initiate appropriate penal, civil/
criminal action against such defaulting Institutions/ Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated
Individuals as the case maybe.

In case, if such Institutions make a representation, then hearing shall be given to these
Institutions by the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE and decision shall be taken as
per the provisions in the Approval Process Handbook.

NO institution shall take partial approval of programs, i.e. institution running any program under the
purview of the Council shall mandatorily take approval for ALL such Programs. Institutions found in
violation shall be subjected to strict penal action as per Chapter VIII.

Annexure 15 clarifies a few of the common doubts arising to the Stakeholders.

All PGDM /PGCM Institutions shall run all their Courses in Standalone Mode Only. No other Programs/
Courses shall be permitted in the PGDM / PGCM institution.

All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in online mode. Under extraordinary
circumstances (including Court directions), the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in
Offline mode also. All the processing of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency
and Accountability. Signature of experts on the documents submitted/uploaded by Institute on portal
is not necessary if verified online.

In compliance of the order dated 08.11.2019 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of Indian CA No.364/ 2005, for the existing Institutions offering Courses
in Architecture Programme, approval by the Council of Architecture (CoA) is
mandatory and AICTE approval is NOT required.

In compliance of the order dated 05.03.2020 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India in Transferred Petitions (CIVIL) No 87-101 of 2014, for the existing
institutions offering courses in Pharmacy Programme, approval of Pharmacy
Council of India (PCI) is mandatory and AICTE approval is NOT required.

State Public & Private Universities and Central Universities are also not required to
take AICTE approval as per the AICTE Act. However, some of the Universities are
seeking approval of AICTE for availing the benefits of AICTE Schemes/Initiatives as
per the prevailing policies/norms.

Similarly, INTERESTED Architecture and Pharmacy Institutions may apply to AICTE
for approval, provided, they are already having valid approval of CoA and PCI,
respectively on the day of application.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 77 ---
CHAPTER-ITI
Collaboration and Twinning Programme

Between Indian and Foreign University/ Institution or
Between two Indian Institutions in the field of Technical Education,
Research and Training

3.1

3.2

Objectives

a.

To facilitate Collaboration and Twinning Programme between Indian and Foreign Universities/
Institutions as well as between two Indian Institutions in the field of Technical Education,
Research and Training.

To encourage Collaboration and Twinning between AICTE approved Institutions and Institutes
of Repute in the field of Technical Education, Research and Training.

To safeguard the interest of the student community in India and ensure uniform maintenance
of Norms and Standards as prescribed by various Statutory Bodies.

To ensure accountability for all such educational activities by Foreign Universities/ Institutions
in India.

To safeguard against entry of Non-Accredited Institutions in the Country of origin to impart
Technical Education in India.

To safeguard the Nation's interest and take punitive measures, wherever necessary, against the
erring Institutions.

Requirements and Eligibility

a.

Department of an Indian University or Institution which is already in existence and duly
approved by the Council, interested in imparting Technical Education leading to the award
of Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post
Graduate Degree of a University/ Institution through Collaborative/Twinning arrangements,
provided there is “Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure.

The Department of Indian University or Institution should have a valid NBA accreditation
beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year in the Programme/Course for which Twinning is
sought.

Accreditation by the authorized agency in the Parent Country or Top 500 rank in the QS/THE
ranking shall be the pre-requisite condition for any Foreign University or Institution to engage
in Twinning programme/collaborative arrangement with Indian University/Institute.

The Educational Programmes to be conducted in India by Foreign Universities or Institutions
leading to the award of Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post
Graduate Diploma/Post Graduate Degree Level (ONLY for Courses conducted in the timing of
Regular shift) shall have the same nomenclature as it exists in their Parent Country. There shall
not be any distinction in the academic Curriculum, mode of delivery, pattern of examination,
etc. and such Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree should be fully recognized in their Parent Country.

Any Course or Programme, which jeopardizes the National interest, shall not be allowed to be
offered in India.

The Council shall prescribe any other condition for registration, expedient to do so in the
overall interest of the Technical Education system in the Country.

The Indian Partner Institution shall be affiliated to the University/ Board and NOC obtained
from the affiliating University/Board (Not applicable to PGDM Institutions).

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 78 ---
h. The Foreign University/ Institution and the Indian Partner Institution shall enter into a bipartite
agreement/ MoU for this purpose.

i. The Indian Institution and the concerned affiliating University/ Board shall also enter into a
bipartite agreement/ MoU for this purpose.

j. For Course(s) where University/ Board approval is not mandatory, the Foreign University/
Institution and the Indian Partner Institution shall enter into a bipartite agreement/ MoU for
this purpose.

k. The students admitted under the Collaboration and Twinning Programme should spend at
least one Semester of the two years Programme and two Semesters of a four years Programme
of the Course in the Foreign University/ Institution.

I. The students failing to secure Visa should be enrolled in a similar Programme being conducted
by the Indian Partner Institution, affiliated to a University/ Board. The Intake of such students
shall be over and above the “Approved Intake” of the Programme being conducted by the
Indian Partner Institution.

m. The existing Institutions seeking approval for the Introduction of Collaboration and Twinning
Programme shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of Approval Process Handbook.

3.3 Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges

a. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal www.
aicte-india.org failing which, the application shall not be considered. Applications shall be
accepted subject to realization of the Payment.

b. TER Charges for different type of Institutions for Introduction and Continuation of Twinning
Programme(s) is as follows:

Type of Institution Introduction (= in Lakh) Continuation (= in Lakh)

i Minority Institution/ Institution set up in J&K/
Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ Institution set 75 3.0
up exclusively for Women/ PwBD

ii Government/Government aided Institutions/ Nil Nil
Central/ State University
iii | All other Institutions 10.0 5.0

3.4 Procedure

The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee as per Clause 1.6 and shall verify the additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for Collaboration and Twinning Programme.

3.5 Lateral Entry and supernumerary seats shall not be allowed in Foreign Collaboration and
Twinning Programme.

3.6 — The Institution shall submit/ upload an Annual Report giving details of the number of students admitted,
Programme(s) conducted, total Fee collected, amount transferred to the Parent Country, investment
made, number of students awarded Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post
Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree and any other information that the Council shall ask for.

3.7. The Council shall cause an Inspection through EVC, whenever necessary, with or without prior notice,
to assess the Infrastructural and other facilities available/ to verify the compliance of conditions, Norms,
Standards etc. prescribed by the Council from time to time.

3.8 | Degree/Diploma shall be awarded as per the provisions prescribed by UGC on the subject as
amended from time to time.

3.9 (a) Collaboration and Twinning shall be allowed with Foreign University having ranking within top
500 as per the QS World Ranking and Indian University shall be within top 100 NIRF ranking in
the preceding year.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 79 ---
3.10

3.11

b) Collaboration and Twinning shall also be allowed between AICTE approved Institutions (having
valid NBA accredited courses) with an Institute of National Importance passed by an Act of
Parliament

OR

Any other AICTE approved Institutes (having valid NBA accredited courses) with Institutes
falling within top 100 in NIRF ranking.

©) Collaboration and Twinning shall also be allowed between AICTE approved Institutes (having
valid NBA accredited courses) and Category-| Universities.

d) UGC regulations on Joint/Double/Dual Degree as and when notified shall also be applicable.
Violation of any Norms will lead to Withdrawal of Approval for the Institute/University.

Institutions/Universities shall fulfil all terms and conditions as prescribed by UGC, Ministry of
External affairs & MoE from time to time (In addition to the Standard & Norms set by AICTE).

NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in online mode.
Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions), the Scrutiny /
Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Offline mode also. All the processing’s
of Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency and
Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/uploaded by
Institute on portal is not necessary if verified online.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 80 ---
CHAPTER-IV
Grant of Approval for Universities

4.1 Introduction

a. The higher Education system in India includes both Private and Public Universities. Public
Universities are supported by the Government of India and by the State Governments, while
Private Universities are mostly supported by various trusts and Societies. Universities in India
are recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC), which draws its power from the
UGC Act, 1956. The types of Universities include:

i. Central Universities which are established by an Act of Parliament and are under the
purview of MoE.

ii. State Universities are run by the concerned State Government/ Union Territories of
India and are usually established by a local legislative assembly act. University shall also
have “Constituent College’, an Institution/ Department/ College/ School as a part of the
University.

iii. Institutions Deemed to be University is an Institution for Higher Education so declared on
the recommendations of the University Grants Commission by the Central Government,
under Section 3 of the UGC Act.

iv. State Private Universities are established by State/ Central legislature and approved by
the UGC. They can grant degrees but they are not allowed to have Off-Campus/ Affiliated
Colleges.

b. All categories of Universities are expected to maintain standards, higher than the minimum
standards related to infrastructure, Faculty and other norms specified in the AICTE Approval
Process Handbook.

Clause 11 of the AICTE Act, 1987 mandates this Council to conduct inspection to ascertain that
a University is maintaining the standards of teaching, examination and research.

G Central / State and Private Universities may apply for approval by applying online providing
requisite details of infrastructure, land, faculty etc. as specified in the AICTE Approval Process
Handbook.

d. Off-Campus of the University is a Campus established by it and approved by UGC, outside the

main campus (within or outside the State) operated and maintained as its constituent unit,
having the University’s compliment of facilities, Faculty and staff.

e. Area of operation of State Universities/Private Universities/Institutions Deemed to be
Universities shall be as approved by the UGC/ State jurisdiction.

f. Applicants shall submit the application on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org.

g. The applications received shall be processed as per the norms and procedures specified in the
Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall also adhere to the existing Central, State and
Local Laws.

h. Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Course(s)/Programme(s) shall not

admit students without prior approval of the Council.

NOTE: Universities /Institutions Deemed-to-be-Universities shall NOT be permitted to run
PGDM/PGCM course(s) along with other programs. However, Universities running such
programs shall be required to convert the same into regular degree programme in Management
ie MBA.

4.2. Time Schedule for Processing of Applications

a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website from time to time, inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and
processing thereof. The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 81 ---
be final and binding. To process any request from the Universities regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not accepted.

b. The submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal and payment shall not be later than the
last date as notified in the Public Notice/AICTE Website.

4.3 Seeking Approval of the Council

4.3.1 Application for the various categories mentioned in Chapter I, Il and Ill of the Approval
Process Handbook for Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/ Post Diploma
Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level for
conducting Programmes in Engineering and Technology, Planning, Applied Arts, Crafts and
Design, Hotel Management and Catering Technology, MCA and Management.

NOTE: Council shall NOT grant approval for any integrated programme/course which requires
approval from different regulatory bodies.

4.3.2 Requirements and Eligibility

a. Notification issued by the Government under Central/ State Act declaring an Institution
as a Central/ State/ Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a
Deemed to be University.

b. The Central / State / Private / Institution Deemed to be University shall be a registered
Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 through the Chairman/ Secretary of
Society or a Trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, 1882 as amended from time to
time or any other relevant Acts through the Chairman/Secretary of the Trust or a Company
established under Section 8 of Companies Act, 2013 or Central or State Government/ UT
Administration or by a Society or a Trust registered with them.

c. Provided that the members/ Trustees/ promoters of a managing Trust/ Society/ Company
of an Institution Deemed to be University, not being controlled by Government/ UT,
shall not be directly or indirectly connected with the members/ Trustees/ promoters of a
managing Trust/ Society/Company.

4.3.3 In all the above cases, Universities seeking approval for the first time from AICTE shall submit
an online application through web portal as a new Technical Institution for all their existing
Technical Programme(s) and Course(s). University having Multiple Campuses/ Off Campuses/
Constituent Colleges shall apply separately for approval.

The Central / State / Private Universities are taking approval from AICTE for some of the
selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake which is creating confusion to the students.
Therefore, the Central / State / Private Universities, which are interested in obtaining AICTE
approval shall have to obtain approval for all the Technical Programme(s)/ Course(s) / intake
and not just for few selected Technical Programme(s)/Course(s)/intake (at any level) after
fulfilling the mandatory requirement of AICTE norms notified from time to time.

As regards, Institutions Deemed to be Universities, it is mandatory to have AICTE approval
from the Academic Year 2018-19 in compliance of the Hon’ble Supreme Court Order dated
03-11-2017 passed in CA No.17869- 17870 /2017. It is found that some of the Deemed to
be Universities have yet to take AICTE approval or taken approval partially for selected
Technical Course(s)/ Programme(s)/ Intake (at any level). Therefore, Institutions Deemed to be
Universities who have never taken approval from AICTE are directed NOT to run any Technical
Programme(s)/Course(s) without prior approval of AICTE.

NOTE: Application for partial approval of any Programme(s)/Course(s)/Intake at any level shall
NOT be permitted.

4.3.4 Universities in existence seeking approval for the first time from AICTE shall be processed
without applying the recommendations of National Perspective Plan for Technical Programmes.
4.4 Submission of Application
4.4.1. USERID and Password

a. A unique USER ID and Password shall be allotted to each new application on payment
of = 5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand Only), through the payment gateway on AICTE

Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 82 ---
b. The Universities already approved by AICTE shall use the USER credentials allotted to
them previously.

c. If any University has forgotten the Password, the University shall apply online. Technical
Education Regulatory (TER) Charges of %5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand Only) shall be
made through the payment gate way on AICTE Web-Portal. The proof of payment and an
Affidavit 1 for“Forgotten Password” shall be submitted to the concerned Regional Office.
Regional Officer shall verify the same from the web portal for allotment of Password to the
Applicants.

d. Using the USER ID Account, the application in the prescribed Format shall be filled and
submitted on AICTE Web-Portal @ www.aicte-india.org. An unique application number
will be generated on the successful submission of application. Using this application
number, the Applicant shall be able to track the status of the application at various stages
of processing.

44.2. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges

a. _ Existing Universities offering Technical Programme(s) at Diploma/Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree applying for the
grant of approval for the first time:

SI. No. Type of University *TER Charges Z in Lakh
i Central University/ State University/ Institution Deemed to Nil
be University (Government)
ii Institution Deemed to be University (Private)/State Private 8.0
University
iii University set up in J&K/ Ladakh/ North Eastern States/ 6.0

University set up exclusively for Women

iv ALL Applicants under (ii) whose application was rejected and 3.0
issued Final LoR in the previous year i.e. 2021-22**

*Separate TER charges shall be applicable in case of main and off campus as approved by UGC

** Applicable for Application which was rejected in 2021-22 and TER Charges refunded under Clauses 1.4.2 (g) and 1.4.7 (b) of Chapter
of the Approval Process Handbook.

b. Inan extraordinary circumstance, if an additional online Scrutiny Committee and Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate* Committee has to be conducted (inclusive
of the Court directions to any type of Institution /University other than Central/State
Universities /Institution deemed to be university (Government)), then the Applicant has

to remit 70.5 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.

c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional online Expert Visit Committee has to be
conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions other than Central/
State Universities/Institution deemed to be university (Government)), the Applicant has
to remit 71.0 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.

d. The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.

e. Only those applications submitted (including payment) within the cut-off date as
mentioned in the Public Notice/ AICTE Website shall be considered for processing.

4.4.3 All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/edited are correct. Facility to edit the data
available until the submission of the application by pressing the “submit” tab.

After pressing the “submit” tab, the modification of data shall not be allowed till the processing
of application is completed. Hence, applicants shall exercise utmost caution before pressing
the “submit” tab.

Submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as mentioned in
the Public Notice/ AICTE Website is MANDATORY.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 83 ---
444 An Affidavit 2 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner
on %100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper shall be Digitally Signed (Using DSC) &
uploaded on AICTE Portal. In case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions,
civil and/or criminal as per the Regulations in place.

44.5 A printout of the complete online application (for categories falling under Chapter | of the
Approval Process Handbook) as submitted on AICTE Web-Portal, along with the proof of
payment, and documents mentioned as per Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust shall be submitted on the date of Scrutiny
at the Regional Office (in case of offline) or to be uploaded on AICTE Web-portal with digital
signature (in case of online), failing which the Scrutiny shall not be conducted.

44.6 Applications submitted for the categories mentioned under Chapter II and Ill shall submit/
upload the documents as applicable in Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook.

44.7 Applications complete in all respects shall ONLY be processed.
4.5 Grant of Approval
4.5.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company shall have the Land as required and has its Lawful
possession with clear title in the name of the Promoter Trust/Society/Company/Institution
on or before the date of submission of application.

Further to that it shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed
University to mortgage the Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of Letter
of Approval (LoA), only for raising the resources for the purpose of development of the
University situated on that Land.

b. University shall fulfill ALL the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.
Further that, the Institution Deemed to be Universities shall also have to fulfil the norms
as per UGC Regulations.

c. Buildings for the First Year of the Programme(s) should be completed in all respect as per
the Infrastructure requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. Building
Plan for the entire duration of the Programme(s) of the University shall be prepared by
an Architect registered with Council of Architecture/Licensed Survey or and shall be
approved by the Competent Authority as designated by concerned State Government/
UT.

d. The Head of the “University” shall be named as “Vice Chancellor” having qualifications as
per UGC norms.

4.5.2 The Applicants shall not use name of the University in such a way that the abbreviated form
of the name of the University becomes IIM/IIT/IISc/NIT/ISER/IIT/IEST/AICTE/UGC/ MoE/ Gol.
The Applicant shall also not use the word(s) Government, India, Indian, National, All India,
All India Council, Commission anywhere in the name of the University and other names as
prohibited under the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950. Provided
that, the restrictions mentioned above shall not be applicable, if the University is established
by Government of India or its name is approved by the Government of India.

4.5.3. The Applicant shall apply in AICTE Web-Portal for all the Technical Programme(s) as approved
by UGC for Approval.

4.5.4 Procedure

The application shall be processed as per Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 of the Approval Process
Handbook (Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee followed by an Expert Visit Committee). The date
of visit shall be communicated through e-mail. It shall be necessary to provide Built-up area as
per the norms required to conduct all the existing Course(s).

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 84 ---
4.6

Evaluation of the Application by Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee

a.

The applications shall be evaluated by a Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee constituted as per
Appendix 13.4 of the Approval Process Handbook by the Regional Officer by the selection of
members through automated selection process on AICTE Web-Portal. However, if any member
of the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee is unable to attend or refuses or is incapacitated to
take part in the Committee, then Regional Officer with prior or post facto approval of the
Competent Authority of AICTE, shall opt to choose another expert from approved panel of the
experts manually. Under extraordinary circumstances, the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee
shall also be constituted manually by the Regional Officer with prior/post facto approval of the
Chairman.

The date and time for Scrutiny shall be informed by the concerned Regional Office.

Concerned Regional Officer or an Officer of the Council shall assist the Committee and place
relevant records and documents before the Committee and make necessary arrangements for
the conduct of the meetings; however, he/she shall not be part of the Committee.

Two representatives of the Applicant shall be invited to present their case along with the
supporting documents before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee. Self-attested Photo ID
proof and an authorization letter from the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company
shall be produced to the Committee.

The Applicants are classified into THREE categories, as Category |, Il and Ill. Universities that have
NAAC score 3.51 and above; 3.26 to 3.50 and notified as Category |/ Il respectively as per the
UGC (Categorization of Universities (Only) for grant of Graded Autonomy) Regulations, 2018.
University shall be in Category Ill, if it does not come either under Category | or Category Il.

NOTE: For Category I/ Il Universities applying for other domains (for e.g. Medical University),
applying for approval of Engineering and Technology Programme shall be processed similar to
a new Technical Institutions provided the university is already running courses in Engineering
and Technology.

To consider the Off Campuses/ Constituent Colleges of Category |/ Il Universities, UGC Letter
mentioning to that effect shall be produced, else the applications shall be processed as per
Clause 4.5.4 of the Approval Process Handbook.

For Applicants falling under Category I/II the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the following:

i. | NAAC Certificate having scores more than 3.26 and letter issued by UGC declaring the
status of the University.

ii. Notification issued by the Government under Central/ State Act declaring an Institution
as a Central/ State/ Private University or section 3 of UGC Act declaring an Institution as a
Deemed to be University

iii. UGC approval letter(s) for the main Campus and Off Campuses, if any

iv. Affidavit 2 and Affidavit 5 (Universities shall have to adhere to norms and standards
specified by AICTE from time to time and an Affidavit 5 to this effect shall be submitted
to the UGC).

Applicants falling under Category Ill shall present their application and ALL original documents
along with self-attested copies as per Appendix 16 (as applicable) of the Approval Process
Handbook and UGC approval Letter(s) for the Main Campus and Off Campuses, if any,
before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee (in case of offline) or to be uploaded on AICTE
Web- portal with digital signature (in case of online). Applicants shall adhere to Scrutiny/
Re-Scrutiny schedule and not to remain absent at the time of Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny.
TER Charges per campus to be charged as per Table 4.4.2 (ii).

The Scrutiny Committee shall verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the
Application as mentioned above and shall counter sign in all the documents that are accepted
(if conducted offline).

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 85 ---
j. Based on the recommendations of the Scrutiny Committee, the deficiencies, if any, shall be
communicated to the Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company through Web-Portal.

k. Applicants who are communicated deficiencies or remain absent at the time of Scrutiny shall be
eligible for Re-Scrutiny. The date and time for Re-Scrutiny shall be informed by the concerned
Regional Office.

I. The Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify only the deficiencies pointed out by the Scrutiny
Committee as per the norms and standards and shall countersign the documents that are
accepted (if conducted offline).

m. The Regional Officer shall ensure and certify that all the fields of the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny
Committee Report are filled completely.

n. Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny
Committee in case of Applicants falling under Category I/Il shall be placed before Regional
Committee for recommendation of issue of LoA and in case of Category Ill, the same shall
be processed further by an Expert Visit Committee. The date of visit shall be communicated
through Web-Portal.

0. Applicant shall submit one set of attested copies of original documents to the Regional Office
produced before online Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny committee.

4.7 Application shall be processed by Expert Visit Committee as per Clause 1.7 of the Approval Process
Handbook. However, a Vice Chancellor/Former Vice Chancellor/Director of IIT/NIT nominated by
AICTE shall be the Chairman of the Expert Visit Committee

4.8 Application shall be processed by Regional Committee as per Clause 1.8 of the Approval Process
Handbook

4.9 Grant of Approval shall be as per Clause 1.9 of the Approval Process Handbook

a. The Executive Committee after considering the recommendations of the Regional Committee
and views of the Approval Bureau shall take decision to grant of approval or otherwise. The
decisions of the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.

b. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form of
a Letter of Approval (LoA) or Letter of Rejection (LoR) with the specific reasons for rejection of
the application.

G Applicants (except Central University/ State University/Institution Deemed to be University
(Government)) whose applications are recommended for Letter of Approval (LoA) by the
Executive Committee shall be informed for submission of Security Deposit as applicable as per
Clause 1.9(c) of the Approval Process Handbook

i. State University/ Central University/ Institution Deemed to be University (Government)/
are not required to pay the Security Deposit.

ii. Institution Deemed to be University (Private)/ Private Universities which were in existence
for more than 10 years with UGC are EXEMPTED from the payment of Security Deposit,
else the University shall pay the Security Deposit for 10 Years as per Approval Process
Handbook.

iii. If any University starting a new Programme/ Level shall create the Security Deposit as per
the requirements of the Approval Process Handbook, even if the University is in existence
for more than 10 years with UGC.

iv. Universities which were granted approval from AICTE earlier as a Technical Institution and
created Security Deposit and got released after the maturity period are not required to pay
the Security Deposit; else the University shall pay the Security Deposit for the remaining
period of 10 years, as applicable.

d. The amount deposited by the University shall remain with the Council. The interest accrued
on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional Development activities, Quality
Improvement Programme for Faculty and giving Scholarships to students.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 86 ---
e. The Principal amount ONLY shall be returned to the Trust/ Society/ Company on completion of
the term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further period
as shall be decided on a case to case basis and/or forfeited in case of any violation of norms,
conditions, and requirements and/ or Non-Performance by the University and/ or Complaints
against the University.

f. An Expert Visit Committee may be conducted any time before the first batch of students has
passed out, to verify the fulfilment of the norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

g. If the application for the new Institution Deemed to be University/University is rejected at the
Level of Scrutiny/Re- Scrutiny and not availed the appeal provision, the TER Charges after a
deduction of %0.5 Lakh shall be refunded to the Applicant.

h. The Council shall normally not grant Conditional Approval to any University.

i. The University/Applicant, if aggrieved by the decision of Executive Committee, shall appeal as
per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook and the final decision of the Council shall
be uploaded on or before 30th April of the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Hon’ble
Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30th, 2022.

j. Faculty shall be made available as per the norms, standards and conditions prescribed by the
Council from time to time.

k. A final Letter of Approval/ Letter of Rejection with the reasons for rejection of the application
shall be issued to the University through Web-Portal, on or before 30" April of the Calendar
Year. However, due to pandemic Hon’ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

I. LoA shall not be granted after 30" April of the Calendar Year incompliance to the order dated
13.12.2012 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in CA No.9048/2012. However, due
to pandemic Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

4.10 Universities granted approval for offering Technical Programme at Diploma/Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level shall submit an application
to the Council every year for Extension of Approval of Course(s) offered by the University.

4.11 Applications submitted for other Categories in Chapter II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook

a. The requirements, eligibility and procedure shall be as per the concerned Clauses of Chapter
II/ Ill of the Approval Process Handbook. However, Expert Visit Committee for the Introduction
of supernumerary seats for OCI/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf
Countries for Category I/ Il Universities shall be exempted.

b. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges
SI. No. Type of University TER Charges f in Lakh
i Central / State / Institution Deemed to be Nil
University (Government)
ii State Private/ Institution Deemed to be Corresponding TER Charges as mentioned in
University (Private) Chapter I/Il/Ill

In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee and Standing Hearing
Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (inclusive of the Court
directions to any type of Institutions),then the Applicant has to remit ¥0.5Lakh through online
as an additional TER Charges.

C In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee has to be conducted
(inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the Applicant has to remit =1.0
Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges.

d. The applications shall be processed as per the procedure specified in the Approval Process
Handbook and the Executive Committee/ Council shall grant Extension of Approval as
applicable for Universities to continue for conduct of Technical Programme(s) and Course(s).
The decisions taken by the Executive Committee shall be ratified by the Council.

e. The decision of the Council shall be included in the issuance of Extension of Approval and
uploaded in the Web-Portal and the Universities shall download the same through their login.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 87 ---
Speaking orders (in case of reduction in Intake, No Admission, etc.) shall be uploaded in the
Web-Portal not later than 10" May of the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Hon'ble
Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

4.12 Increase in Intake/ New Course shall be processed as per Clause 2.14 of Chapter Il of the Approval
Process Handbook. The Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee shall verify the additional documents as
specified in Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Institutions Deemed to be Universities offering Technical Programme(s) approved by the Council, falling
under Category-| / Il (as declared by UGC) shall have to submit an application to the Council indicating
the increase in Intake in the Courses/New Course(s)in Emerging /Multidisciplinary areas. The Council
shall be granting approval to those Programmes/ Courses. However, such Universities shall have to
update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply the norms and standards as specified
by AICTE from time to time. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to
UGC with this effect.

If any complaints are received about violation of the norms, AICTE shall inspect the University and
inform UGC to take appropriate action. In case of Institution Deemed to be University, the action as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to UGC.

4.13 Extension of Approval shall not be granted after 30" April of the Calendar Year in compliance to the
order dated 13.12.2012 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India CA No.9048/ 2012. However, due
to pandemic Hon’ble Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30", 2022.

4.14 Institutional information shall be updated on AICTE Web-Portal by the Institution for downloading the
Extension of Approval letter.

4.15 Student's eligibility for admission shall be as per Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.
4.16 Institutions shall follow the Academic Calendar as per Appendix 19 of the Approval Process Handbook.

4.17 Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal before 30" September of the Calendar Year
(As per revised Academic Calendar - 2022-23).

4.18 Board of Governors (BoG)/Board of Management (BoM) shall be constituted for Institution Deemed to
be University (Private)/ State Private University. BoM of Universities shall be as per Acts and Statutes of
UGC. The minutes of the meetings shall be uploaded periodically in the website of the Universities.

4.19 The Universities shall display in their web site the mandatory disclosure including students admitted,
their Fee structure, Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Programme, Refund Policies.

4.20 To maintain a high standard in Technical Education, the Universities shall adopt quality measures such
as revision of Curricula in tune with the changing trends in the industrial development, performing
Academic Audit, conducting innovative academic and sponsored research, publishing papers in
refereed journals and apply for the granting Patents.

4.21 Institutions Deemed to be Universities that have been recognized as an Institute of Eminence by the
Ministry of Education, Government of India shall be exempted from the annual approval Process and
accorded approvals for offering Technical Programmes/ Courses. However, such Universities shall have
to update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply the norms and standards as specified
by AICTE from time to time. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 2 to AICTE and Affidavit 5 to
UGC to this effect. If any complaints are received about the violation of the norms, AICTE shall inspect
the University and inform the MoE and UGC to take appropriate action. In case of Institution Deemed to
be University, the action as specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed
to the MoE and UGC.

4.22 An lnstitution (Deemed to be University) found running a technical programme without prior approval
of the council shall be liable for appropriate penal action as per Chapter VIII.

NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted preferably in
online mode. Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions)
the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Offline mode also.
Proceedings of the Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have
Transparency and Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/
uploaded by Institute on portal is not necessary if verified online.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 88 ---
CHAPTER-V
Open and Distance Learning (ODL)/Online Learning (OL)

for Standalone Institutions, Institutions Deemed to be Universities, Universities
and Autonomous Affiliated Colleges*

5.1 Introduction

a. As the new National Education Policy (NEP)- 2020 has laid emphasis on increasing Gross
Enrolment Ratio (GER) through the use of technology and ICT, to fulfil the objectives of NEP-
2020 and to promote ODL and Online Education AICTE has framed comprehensive Guidelines
for imparting Education through ODL & Online mode.All India Council for Technical Education
(Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines,2021 shall apply
to Standalone Institutions, Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities (Central,
State and State Private) for all Courses of learning at the Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/
Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level programmes/
courses in Management, Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science,
Logistics and Travel & Tourism.

b. The Council shall NOT allow Open and Distance Learning Diploma /Degree / Post Graduate
Degree in Engineering and Technology-except mentioned explicitly in the ODL/OL guidelines,
Planning, Hotel Management and Catering Technology, Applied Arts and Crafts, and Design
Programmes.

c As per the UGC (Open and Distance Learning Programmes and Online Programmes) Regulations
2020, approval of respective regulatory body is necessary for running the programmes of that
domain and accordingly Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities shall take
approval of AICTE and also necessarily shall take the approval of UGC in order to actually run
the programme. In respect of autonomous colleges, UGC regulations on the subject shall
prevail.

d. The NAAC / NBA Score as per the guidelines notified by UGC/AICTE from time to time shall be
applicable for the Institution(s) Deemed to be University and Universities in respect of ODL and
Online courses.

NOTE: NBA score shall be applicable for Standalone Institutions as well as for Institution(s)
Deemed to be Universities / Universities as per the AICTE (ODL & Online Education)
Guidelines, 2021.

5.2. Norms and Requirements

5.2.1. The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities intending
to run Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode and / or online mode shall submit an
application to the Council for the Academic year and subsequent years for Approval / Extension
of Approval for the Courses approved/ Increase/ reduction in Approved Intake in the Courses/
Introduction of new Course(s)/ Closure of Course(s).

5.2.2 NO Institution (Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University)

shall offer a technical Programme/ Course in Open and Distance Learning / online mode and
admit students without prior approval of the Council.
Note : Applications which are found to be in order in all respects by the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny
Committee in case of Applicants falling under Category I/Il shall be placed before Regional
Committee for recommendation of issue of LoA and in case of Category Ill, the same shall be
processed further as per the provision of APH 2021-22.

5.2.3. NO Supernumerary seats shall be allotted to Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode/
Online mode.

a. Learner's enrolment (for Open and Distance Learning mode): A Learner residing in
any part of the Country may enroll in any programme being offered by an Institution
recognized by the AICTE for offering programme under Open and Distance Learning
mode provided that the Institution shall conduct all activities such as admissions, contact
programmes, examinations etc. for learner strictly within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Institution as specified in these regulations. The total number of Learners admitted at any
Learner Support Centre shall not exceed 1000 at any time, subject to fulfilment of other
conditions as prescribed in AICTE-APH. In case the enrolment is higher than 1000 at a

*Subject to the revised regulations of UGC

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 89 ---
Learner Support Centre, the number of positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on
pro-rata basis.

b. Learner's enrolment (for Online mode): A Learner residing within or outside India may
enroll in any programme being offered by an Institution recognized by the AICTE for
offering programme under Online mode.

NOTE: Candidate who obtained School Leaving Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in a Foreign
Institution shall produce an Equivalency Certificate issued by the Association of Indian
Universities for admission to a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University
and University in India.

5.2.4 Academic and Administrative Requirements

a. A Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University shall have a
designated Centre of Distance Education at Headquarters for operationalising the Courses
in Open and Distance Learning mode, which shall be headed by a regular functionary not
below the rank of a Professor and shall have the following positions on Full Time and
dedicated basis, excluding the designated positions in the Open Universities as per their
respective Act(s), along with the infrastructural facilities. In addition to the Headquarters,

an Institution may have Learner Support Centre(s).

If an Institution is intending to operate the Headquarters as Learner Support Centre,
an intake upto 10000 Learners shall be permitted. In case, the enrolment is higher than
10000 at Headquarters, the number of positions and Infrastructure shall be increased on
pro-rata basis.

Academic and Administrative Requirements at Headquarters (upto 10000 students)
Staff requirements Number

1 |Head for each discipline at Professor Level 1
2  |Minimum Academic staff strength per discipline or specialization or Course
Associate Professor 1
Assistant Professor 2
3 |Administrative staff strength at the Institution
Deputy Registrar

Assistant Registrar

Section Officer

Assistants
Computer Operator
Multi-Tasking Staff

Ni[wmlwlo}]/ol/o

b. The total number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre shall not exceed
1000 at any time, subject to fulfillment of other conditions as specified in the AICTE (Open
and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021. In case the
enrolment is higher than 1000 at a Learner Support Centre, the number of positions and
Infrastructure shall be increased on pro-rata basis.

Academic and Administrative Requirements of each Learning Supporting Centre

(upto 1000 students)

Staff requirements Number
1 Assistant Professor (Coordinator) 1
2 | Counsellor per Theory Course of 4 Credits 2
3 | Supervisor per Practical Course of 2 Credits 1
4 Computer Operator 1

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 90 ---
5.2.5 Infrastructure Requirements

The Institution shall have necessary infrastructure and support system for offering the
Courses in Openand Distance Learning Mode and / or Online Mode.

Minimum Infrastructure Requirements for ODL/Online (For both Institution Headquarters and
Learner Support Centre)

SI. No. Type of Built-up Area Percentage (%) Headquarters Learner Support
inSqm Centre’ in Sqm
1 |Academic Area 50 696.8 66
2 _|Administrative Area 10 139.4 13.2

Academic support such as Library,
Reading Room, Computer Centre,
Informational and Communication 30 418.0 39.6
Technology Laboratories, Video
and Audio Laboratories, etc.

4  |Amenities or other support facilities

10 139.4 13.2
Area
5 |Minimum Built-up area for Open and Distance Learning 1393.6 132
activity

# There is NO requirement for Learner Support Center to run Online Mode.

The Institution shall use additional Laboratory facilities of the parent Institution or any
other AICTE approved Institution offering similar Course/ Programme.

Each Learner Support Centre shall have a minimum Built-up area of 132 Sq m on the basis
that it shall have at least one Class room for the interaction with the Learners.

Minimum Internet Speed required at Headquarters/ Learner Support Centre is 100 Mbps.

The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the physically
challenged students and elderly persons comprising of Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others
including parents of the students visiting the Institution. Barrier Free Built Environment
for disabled/ elderly persons shall be available in the Buildings, including the availability
of specially designed toilets for Ladies and Gents. Refer Design Manual for a Barrier Free
Environment available in AICTE Web-Portal www.aicte-india.org.

Every Building should have at least one entrance accessible to the physically challenged
and shall be indicated with a proper signage. The entrance shall be approached through
a ramp together with the stepped entry. Refer guidelines and space standards for Barrier
Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons by CPWD, Ministry of Urban
Development, and Government of India. (Refer Handbook on Barrier free and Accessibility
http://cpwd.gov.in).

All teaching-learning facilities for physically challenged Learners shall be provided in
the Ground Floor itself.Unisex toilets with all facilities shall be provided in each floor or at
least in the Ground Floor at Headquarters as well as Learner Support Centres as specified
by the National Building Code.

Safety and security measures at all the Learner Support Centres and Headquarters to
safeguard Students, Staff and the general Campus community from the threat of violence,
and to provide appropriate interventions to support individuals in crisis shall be ensured.

The minimum requirement for Built-up Area shall be fulfilled as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook as amended from time to time

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 91 ---
5.2.6

5.2.7

5.2.8

5.2.9

Maintenance of infrastructural, academic and other quality standards by Standalone Institution/
Institution Deemed to be University shall be as per the respective Part Ill of AICTE (Open and
Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021(As amended from time
to time).

Admission, Examinations and Learner Support shall be as per the respective Part IV of AICTE
(Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021 (As amended
from time to time).

Assessment, Accreditation, Audit, Inspection and Monitoring shall be as per the respective Part
V of AICTE (Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education) Guidelines, 2021 (As
amended from time to time).

Norms for Intake

+ The Standalone Institution, Institution Deemed to be University and University shall apply
for the Programmes/ Courses as per Clause 5.1 at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/
Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma / Post Graduate Degree Levels with the
proposed Intake in Headquarters and/ or each Learner Support Centre.

+ The Council shall grant approval for the Courses along with their Approved Intake in each
Learner Support Centre, subject to the fulfilment of AICTE (Open and Distance Learning
Education and Online Education) Guidelines by the Headquarters and the number of
Learner Support Centres through the Procedure specified in this Chapter.

+ — The “Approved Intake” for ODL / Online Programmes / Courses shall be as per the UGC
(Open and Distance Learning mode and Online Learning Mode) regulations dated
4th September 2020 and as amended from time to time.

Courses offered in ODL/OL Mode

SI.No. Programme / Course Nomenclature of Degree / Diploma / Certificate
1. Management Master of Business Administration (MBA) / Post Graduate Diploma in
Management (PGDM) / Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
2. Computer Applications | Master of Computer Application (MCA) / Post Graduate Diploma in
Computer Application (PGDCA) / Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
3. Artificial Intelligence Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
and Data Science
4. Logistics Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
5. Travel and Tourism Post Graduate Diploma (PGD)/ Post Graduate Certificate (PGC)
5.2.10 The Headquarters and each Learner Support Centre of Standalone Institution/ Institution
Deemed to be University shall establish Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism, Anti Ragging
Committee, Grievance Redressal Committee and Internal Complaint Committee (ICC),
Harassment of Women Committee, SC/ST Committee as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.
5.2.11 All Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities shall upload
the Transcripts and Certificates of all students enrolled, Year wise and Course wise for all Learner
Support Centers (if applicable) including Headquarters, on National Academic Depositary
(NAD).
5.2.12 In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected

from the student, after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) shall be refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions
to retain the School/ Institution Leaving Certificates in original.

In case, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the vacated seat is consequently filled
by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must refund the Fee collected
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only)
and proportionate deductions of Fee, where applicable.

The same shall be affected to the students admitted in July/ January session, as applicable.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 92 ---
5.2.13 The Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities shall
display in their Website the mandatory disclosure as specified in the Guidelines including the
nomenclature of the Courses and Approved Intake, students admitted, their Fee structure,
Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Course, Refund Policy, etc. in each Learner
Support Centre including headquarter.

5.3. Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, as applicable to the
Headquarters and each Learner Supporting Centre shall be digitally signed and uploadedon AICTE
Web-portal and original copy to be shown to the Scrutiny Committee.

5.4 Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook, as applicable to the
Headquarters and each Learner Supporting Centre shall be digitally signed and uploaded on AICTE
Web-portal and original copy to be shown to Expert Visit Committee.

5.5 Time schedule for Processing Applications
a. AICTE shall notify through a Public Notice in the leading newspapers and through AICTE
Website inviting applications with cut-off dates for various categories and processing thereof.
The time schedule mentioned in the Public Notice/AICTE Web-site shall be final and binding. To
process any request from the standalone institutions/Universities regarding approval, online
application is mandatory. Applications submitted offline are not valid.

b. The submission of an application on AICTE Web-Portal and payment of TER Charges shall not
be later than the last date as notified in the Public Notice.
C Universities (outside the purview of AICTE), can make Online applications round the year.

However, their application shall be processed only when UGC notifies the same for that
academic session.

5.6 Seeking Approval of the Council
5.6.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities)
or Standalone PGDM/PGCM Institutions, may apply for offering programmes through
the Open and Distance Learning mode and/ or online mode, courses in the field of
Management and allied areas, Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence and Data
Science, Logistics and Travel & Tourism who fulfill the following conditions, namely :

|. Universities (Central/State Public or Private)/ Institution Deemed to be University having
NAAC score of 3.26 and above on a 4-point scale;

OR
Universities (Central/State Public or Private)/ Institutions Deemed to be University having
a rank in Top-100 in the University category of National Institutional Ranking Framework
(NIRF), at least twice in three preceding cycles (at the time of application);
shall be permitted to start full-fledged ODL courses and/ or Online courses without prior
approval of the AICTE, provided they satisfy all other conditions mentioned in these
regulations.

ll. Standalone Institutions (PGDM /PGCM) having a NBA Score of 700 on a scale of 1000;

shall be permitted to start full-fledged ODL courses and/ or Online courses without prior
approval of the AICTE; provided they satisfy all other conditions mentioned in the AICTE
ODL / Online guidelines.
However, all such Universities, Institutions Deemed to be Universities / Standalone
Institutions shall be required to register on AICTE web portal to submit the desired
information regarding Faculty /Students admission data annually and comply with all the
provisions of the Guidelines and shall be required to submit an affidavit to the AICTE.

b. The Universities (Central, State Public or Private, Institutions Deemed to be Universities)
or Standalone PGDM/PGCM Institutions, may apply for offering programmes through the
ODL mode and / or Online mode, who fulfil the following conditions, namely:

|. Shall be in existence for minimum five years with at least two batches passed out;

and
ll. For University/Institution Deemed to be University:

Shall be accredited by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council with a minimum
score of 3.01 on a 4-point scale;

OR

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 93 ---
Shall be in the top-100 in the University category in the National Institutional Ranking
Framework at least once in last 2 preceding cycles as per UGC/AICTE Gazette notification
(at the time of application)

Ill. Standalone Institutions (PGDM /PGCM) having NBA accreditation with at least 650 points
ona scale of 1,000

Provided, such, Universities shall acquire NAAC score of 3.26 or NBA Accreditation with a
minimum score of 700 points on a scale of 1000 in the next 2-years from the date of initial
approval of the courses offered in the Open and Distance Learning mode and/ or online mode

NOTE: However, all such Universities, Institutions Deemed to be Universities / Standalone
Institutions shall be required to submit the desired information regarding Faculty / Students
admission data annually and comply with all the provisions of the Guidelines and shall be
required to submit an affidavit to the AICTE.

Further, above Universities/ Institutions-Deemed to be Universities / Standalone Institutions
shall be required to submit an online application on AICTE Web-portal and comply with all
provisions mentioned in the Guidelines.

c. Open Universities may run ODL / Online programmes only in the courses permitted by AICTE
from time to time, provided they meet all the requirements of the guidelines of AICTE.

NOTE: However, these Universities shall be required to register on AICTE web portal to submit
the desired information regarding Faculty /Students admission data annually and shall be
required to submit an affidavit to the AICTE.

d. The University/ Standalone Institution shall have necessary Infrastructure, Faculty and
Support System for offering the Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode/ online
mode in Management, Computer Applications, Artificial Intelligence and Data Science,
Logistics, and Travel and Tourism.

e. The University/ Institutions Deemed to be University/ Standalone Institution shall have been
running the above mentioned Courses in the conventional mode of classroom teaching.

NOTE: Affiliated Colleges / Institutions are NOT eligible to offer/conduct ANY program in
Open and Distance Learning /Online mode.

5.6.2. The existing Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University shall
use their existing Login ID and Password for submission of online application in the format
specified by the AICTE.

5.6.3. Technical Education Regulatory (TER) Charges

a. TER Charges & in Lakh for Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities
and Universities offering Courses at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level in Open and Distance Education Learning and
Online Learning mode are given below:

Standalone Institutions/ Institution Deemed to be TER Charges @ in Lakh

University/ University *
1 |New application for the conduct of Online*/ Open and
Distance Learning Courses from Standalone Institution/
Private University/Institution Deemed to be University 8.0
(Headquarters and upto 2 Learner Support Centers for the
total Intake upto 10000)

2 |Each additional Learner Support Centre (Intake upto1000) 3.0

3 _| Extension of Approval (Intake upto1000) 0.50

4 |Increase in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of 2.0 for each Learner Support Centre
new Course(s) concerned or Headquarters

5 |Closure of Course(s)/ Reduction in Intake/ Change in the 0.10 for each Learner Support Centre
Name of the Course(s) or Headquarters

6 |All applicants under (1) whose applications were rejected 2.0

and issued Final LoR in the presence year i.e. 2020-21**

*Not Applicable for Government and Government Universities.
# Learner support center NOT applicable.

** Not applicable for Applications which were rejected in 2020-21 and TER Charges
refunded.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 94 ---
5.6.4

5.6.5

5.6.6

5.6.7

NOTE: The total number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre shall not
exceed 1000 at any time. In case of applied/ Approved Intake (as applicable) is higher than
1000 at a Learner Support Centre, accordingly the number of Learner Support Centre
(Intake in multiples of 1000) shall be considered for calculating TER Charges.

b.  Inanextraordinary circumstance, if an additional Scrutiny Committee/additional Standing
Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee has to be conducted (Inclusive of
the Court directions to any type of Institutions), then the Applicant has to remit 0.5 Lakh
through online as an additional TER Charges.

c. In an extraordinary circumstance, if an additional Expert Visit Committee has to be
conducted (inclusive of the Court directions to any type of Institutions), the Applicant has
to remit 1.0 Lakh through online as an additional TER Charges

The TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment gateway on AICTE Web-Portal
within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be considered.

d. Only those applications submitted within the cut-off date, including payment shall be
considered for processing.

e. Incase of eligible refund/ excess payment, if any, after processing, the amount shall be
refunded to the Applicant.

f. Applications rejected at the Level of ONLINE Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny without availing the
appeal provision, the TER Charges after a deduction of %0.5 Lakh shall be refunded to the
Applicant/ Institution.

All Applicants shall ensure that the data entered/ edited are correct. Facility to edit the data is
available until the submission of the application by pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.

After pressing the “SUBMIT” tab, the data entered is not allowed for any further editing till the
processing of the application is completed. Applicants shall exercise utmost caution before
pressing the “SUBMIT” tab.

Application should be submitted on AICTE Web-Portal on or before the last date as notified in
the Public Notice/AICTE Web-site.

A copy of such application shall be displayed on the Website of the Standalone Institution/
Institution Deemed to be University and University by way of Self-Disclosure

a. The application shall be accompanied by evidence of having prepared the self-learning
materials required for the Courses of study, duly approved by the statutory bodies of the
Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University empowered
to decide on academic matters.

b. The application shall be accompanied by evidence of availability of Open and Distance
Learning / Online Learning resources adequate for effective delivery of all the proposed
Courses of study and the expected enrolment of students.

The application shall be accompanied by evidence of the preparedness for establishing
Learner Support Centers, providing Learning Support Services, establishing Centre for
Internal Quality Assurance, availability of academic and other staff in the Unit and Learner
Support Centers of the Institution, availability of qualified Counselors in the Learner
Support Centers meeting such standards of competence as specified in Annexure IV
of AICTE-Open and Distance Learning Education and Online Education Guidelines,
Examination Centers and the administrative arrangements for supportive services for
effective delivery of Open and Distance Learning.

All Applicants shall submit/upload an Affidavit 13 sworn before First Class Judicial Magistrate
or Notary or an Oath Commissioner on =100/- Non-Judicial stamp paper/ e-stamp paper. In
case of any false information, AICTE shall invoke the provisions, both civil and/ or criminal as
per the Regulations in place.

A printout of the complete online application as submitted on AICTE Web-Portal, along with
the proof of payment and documents mentioned duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of
the Trust/ Society/ Company shall be submitted (in case of offline) on the date of Scrutiny at
the Regional Office.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 95 ---
5.6.8 Procedure

a. The application for establishment of Headquarters/ Learner Support Centers shall be
processed as per Clause 1.6 (Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny Committee) followed by an Expert Visit
Committee as per Clause 2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook. The date of visit shall
be communicated through e-mail/AICTE Web-portal. The Council shall not grant approval
to Learner Support Centre(s) without the approval for Headquarters.

Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities offering
Technical Programme(s) approved by the Council, falling under Category |, Il & Ill as
declared by UGC (and as amended from time to time) shall have to submit an application
to the Council indicating the ODL and/ or Online Courses/ increase in Intake in the
Courses/ New Course(s).

Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Universities offering
Technical Programme(s) approved by the Council, falling under Category | & Il as declared
by AICTE/ UGC respectively shall have to submit an application to the Council indicating
the ODL/ Online Courses for increase in Intake in the Courses/ New Course(s). The Council
shall be granting approval to those Accredited Courses. However, such Standalone
Institutions and Institutions Deemed to be Universities and Universities shall have to
update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply the norms and standards
as specified by AICTE from time to time. Standalone Institutions shall have to submit an
Affidavit 13 annually to AICTE. The University shall annually submit Affidavit 13 to AICTE
and Affidavit 5 to UGC to this effect. If any complaints are received about the violation
of the norms, AICTE shall inspect the Institution/ University and the action as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to the UGC about the
Institution Deemed to be University and University.

The Standing Hearing Committee shall recommend the Applied Intake or appropriate
Intake/ reject the application, based on the observation of the Expert Visit Committee
and the compliance of the deficiencies by the Institution.

b. Where the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University has
made an application for offering Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode, not with
standing that in respect of such Courses, UGC had caused the inspection of the Institution
in the past or prior to coming into force of the Guidelines, the AICTE may cause an
inspection, in respect of such Courses, of the Standalone Institutions/ Institution Deemed
to be University at its discretion through an Expert Visit Committee.

c. The consolidated list of all the Standalone Institutions/ Institutions Deemed to be
Universities and Universities with the “Approved Intake” shall be placed by the Approval
Bureau before the Executive Committee/ Council for the grant of Letter of Approval/
Extension of Approval, as applicable. The decisions taken by the Executive Committee
are ratified by the Council. The same shall be notified on the Web-Portal. Further, the
Institution shall download the Letter of Approval/ Extension of approval letter along with
“Approved Intake” through the Institution login.

d. Applicants shall deposit the prescribed amount to AICTE as applicable as per Clause 1.9 (c)
of the Approval Process Handbook. The Applicant shall submit the payment proof of the
Security Deposit along with an Affidavit 3 within 15 days from the date of intimation to
the concerned Regional Office, else a penalty of 10% and 50% of the value of the Security
Deposit shall be imposed upto 315 May and 31* July of the Calendar Year respectively,

beyond which the approval shall be withdrawn.

The amount deposited by the Institution shall remain with the Council for 10 years.
The interest accrued on this deposit shall be utilized by the Council for Institutional
Development activities, Quality Improvement Programme for Faculty, giving Scholarships
to students, etc.

The principal amount ONLY shall be returned to the Trust/Society/ Company on completion
of the term. However, the term of the deposited amount could be extended for a further
period as shall be decided on a case to case basis and/ or forfeited in case of any violation
of norms, conditions, and requirements/ Non-Performance by the Institution/ Complaints
against the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 96 ---
Provided that while passing an order, where the AICTE does not grant approval in respect
of one or more Courses, the AICTE shall specify the grounds of such refusal in the order.

Provided further that before passing an order, AICTE shall provide a reasonable
opportunity to the concerned Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University
and University of being heard including an appeal as specified in the Clause 5.8 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

e. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal in the form
of a Letter of Approval (LoA) (in case of first approval) or Extension of Approval (in case
of already approved) or Letter of Rejection (LoR) with specific reasons for rejection of the
application.

f. | The Council shall normally NOT grant Conditional Approval to any Institution.

g. AnApplicant, if aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, shall appeal as per
Clause 2.27 of the Approval Process Handbook and the same shall be processed as per
the procedure specified therein.

h. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the
Council whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.

i. All approvals shall be uploaded by 30" April of the Calendar Year and in case of already
approved Courses, if reduction in intake, NO Admission, etc. are recommended, then the
detailed speaking orders shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal not later than 15" May of
the Calendar Year. However, due to pandemic Supreme Court has permitted up to July
30, 2022.

j. _ LoA/ EoA shall not be granted after 30" April of the Calendar Year in compliance to the
order dated 13.12.2012 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in CA No. 9048/
2012. However, due to pandemic Supreme Court has permitted up to July 30%, 2022.

5.7 __ Penal Action in case of Violations of the Guidelines

a. Where the Council, on its own motion or on any representation received from any person, or
any information received from any authority or a statutory body, or on the basis of any enquiry
or inspection conducted by it, satisfied that a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to
be University/ University has contravened any of the provisions of the Guidelines and orders
made or issued there under, or has submitted or produced any information and documentary
evidence which is found to be false at any stage or any condition subject to which recognition
has been granted, it may withdraw the approval of such Standalone Institution/ Institution
Deemed to be University and University in respect of such Courses as it may specify, for reasons
to be recorded in writing.

Provided that no such order against the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be
University/ University shall be passed unless a reasonable opportunity for making representation
against the proposed order has been given to such Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed
to be University/ University.

Provided further that, the order of withdrawing or refusing approval passed by the AICTE shall
come into force with immediate effect.

b. If a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University offers any Course
in ODL and/ or Onlinemode after the coming into force of the order withdrawing approval
or where a Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University offering a
Course in ODL and/ or Onlinemode before the commencement of the Guidelines, fails to obtain
approval under the Guidelines for offering Courses in ODL and/ or Onlinemode for academic
session immediately after the notification of Guidelines and subsequent academic sessions, the
Diploma/ Post Diploma/ Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma obtained pursuant
to such Courses shall NOT be treated as a valid qualification.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 97 ---
c. In the event of any Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University
found offering Courses in ODL and/ or Online mode without the approval of the AICTE or in
violation of any of the provisions of these Guidelines or orders made there under, shall be liable
to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council.

+ Issue Show Cause Notice or withdraw the approval for an Academic Year/ upto a maximum
of next five Academic Years/ permanently.

+ In case a Learner Support Centre fails to adhere to the prescribed norms or guidelines,
the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University/ University shall initiate
action for closure of the centre by following due procedures, so that interest of learners is
taken care through some alternative arrangement.

+ — The Institution shall be declared as unapproved Institution and the same shall be displayed
in the AICTE Web-Portal and communicated to the respective State Government.

+ Lodge a First Information Report against the officials or management of the errant
Standalone Institution to take action as per the law.

+  Withhold or debar from receiving funding from AICTE.

+ — Incase of Institution Deemed to be University and University, the action as specified in
the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated and informed to UGC and MoE.

d) In case of any violation of the above said norms, the same shall be processed as per Chapter VIII
of the Approval Process Handbook.

5.8 Appeal Procedure

a. Any Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University aggrieved by an order of
withdrawal of approval may prefer an appeal to the AICTE within a period of 15 days.

b. The Appeal of the Institution (as above) shall be considered by the Standing Appellate
Committee.
c Two representatives of the Applicant (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

or Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with
Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents
before the Standing Appellate Committee.

d. The recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be placed before the Council
whose decision shall be final and the same shall be uploaded on the Web-Portal.

5.9 The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the ODL/OL Courses shall be the same as specified by
UGC on the subject from time-to-time.

5.10 The students shall be admitted TWICE in an Academic Year within the Approved Intake for each Course
as specified in the guidelines.

5.11 Students’ enrollment data in all the Learner Support Centres shall be uploaded to AICTE Web-Portal
within one month from the last date for admission every year. If it is not uploaded, the Council shall not
grant approval to the Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and University in the
next Academic Year.

5.12 The Standalone Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University and Universities shall create a separate
Department/ School/ Centre as Headquarters for offering Courses in ODL and/ or Online mode.

The Institutions shall mandatorily mention the details of Headquarters, enrollment number allotted to
each student by AICTE and the mode of study as Open Distance Learning Education/Online Education
Learning in their Diploma/ Degree Certificate and mark sheets as per the format available in AICTE
Portal.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 98 ---
5.13 As per the UGC (Open and Distance Learning mode and Online Learning Mode) regulations dated
4 September 2020, the definition of “Professional Programmes” means a Programme other than
Programmes in Engineering, Medicine, Dental, Pharmacy, Nursing, Architecture, Physiotherapy and
Programmes not permitted to be offered in distance mode by any Statutory Councils or Regulatory
Authorities to be conducted by the Higher Educational Institutions under Open and Distance Learning
mode or Distance Education mode for the purpose of these Regulations, if any, should be considered
only if the same are approved by the respective Statutory Councils or Regulatory Authorities.

Accordingly, if any State/ Central/ Private University approaches the Council for offering Technical
Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode and/or Online mode, their application shall be processed
as per the norms and procedure specified in this Chapter and the AICTE (Open and Distance Learning
Education and Online Education) Guidelines 2021, the decision of the Council shall be forwarded to
UGC.

5.14 Extension of Approval/ Increase/ Reduction in Intake/ Introduction of New Course(s)/ Closure of
Course(s)/ Change in the Name of the Course(s)

a) The Institution shall submit an online application to the Council through the web portal every
year for the Extension of Approval of the Courses as per schedule mentioned in the public
notice / AICTE Website.

In case of increase in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of new Course(s)/ exceeding
the maximum number of Learners admitted at any Learner Support Centre, the application
shall be considered upon verification of adequate facilities in the concerned Learner Support
Centre(s) by an Expert Visit Committee as per Clause 2.25 of the Approval Process Handbook.

In case of Closure of Course(s)/Change in the Name of the Course(s) at any Learner Support
Centre, the application shall be considered by a Scrutiny Committee as per Clause 2.24 of the
Approval Process Handbook. The applicable TER Charges shall be paid through AICTE payment
gateway on AICTE Web-Portal within the deadline failing which, the application shall not be
considered.

b) The Institutions may apply for non-zero reduction in Intake by themselves in AICTE Web-Portal
and maintain the norms accordingly.

©) The Institutions shall apply for increase in Approved Intake in the Courses/ Introduction of new
Course(s) upto the maximum number of Learners permitted at any Learner Support Centre by
themselves in AICTE Web-Portal and maintain the norms accordingly.

5.15 Provided that, if any Institution propose to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not available
in Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence, as the case may be, by the
Council for the same shall be necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution with due endorsement
by the Registrar/ Director of affiliating University/ Technical Institution shall submit detailed Syllabus
and Curriculum and its nomenclature to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE before 30th
September of the Calendar Year, to process the same in the respective Board.

NOTE: All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted preferably in
online mode. Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions)
the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Offline mode also.
Proceedings of the Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have
Transparency and Accountability. Signature of experts on documents submitted/
uploaded by Institute on portal is not necessary if verified online

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 99 ---
CHAPTER-VI

Vocational Courses under NSQF

Vocational Education prepares individuals for job, makes them perform better by honouring their skills, thus
specializing them at their own Level. Vocational education provides an intensive training and certification
Programme and support the youth in gaining appropriate employment, becoming entrepreneurs and creating
appropriate knowledge

6.1 National Skills Qualification Framework (NSQF)

a.

The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) is a competency-based framework that
organizes all qualifications according to a series of Levels of knowledge, skills and aptitude.
These Levels, graded from one to ten, are defined in terms of learning outcomes which the
learners must possess regardless of whether they are obtained through formal, Non-Formal or
informal learning.

Vocational Courses may be affiliated with existing University or any Skill University/ National
University having jurisdiction for affiliation/ Board of Technical Education as the case may be.

The D.Voc / B.Voc Programmes provide Diploma/ Undergraduate studies which would also
incorporate specific job roles and their Qualification Packs (QPs)/ National Occupational
Standards (NOSs) along with general education.

The Fee for the Vocational Courses shall be regulated by the respective state bodies/ Technical
Boards/ Universities or the case may be.

Any AICTE approved Technical Institution which is, affiliated to respective State Technical
Educational Boards and/ or Universities and which has produced at least two batches
successfully in the relevant branch (Allied domain), is eligible for offering the Vocational
Courses.

The Institution shall have to apply online on AICTE Web-Portal as per the calendar of AICTE for
seeking approval.

An Institution shall be allowed to seek up to 120 seats, with a Division size of 30 each. Institution
may choose one specialisation with four (04) Divisions or four (04) specialisations with one
Division of each specialisation or such other combination.

The institutions offering D.Voc / B.Voc Degree Courses will have to be in constant dialogue
with the industry and respective Sector Skill Council(s) so that they remain updated on the
requirements of the workforce for the local economy.

There will be essentially credit-based modular Programmes, where the credits for skill and
general education components will be permitted so as to enable multiple exit and entry. This
would enable the learner to seek employment after any Level of Award and join back as and
when feasible to upgrade his/her qualification/ skill competency either to move higher in his/
her job or in the higher educational system.

The curriculum in each of the years of the Programme would be a suitable mix of general
education and skill development components. The General Education Component shall have
40% of the total credits and balance 60% credits will be of Skill Component or as amended by
the MoE/ Ministry from time to time.

Education component shall be taught by the Institution and the skill component shall be
covered either by AICTE approved Skill Knowledge Provider (SKP) or Training Provider/ Sector
Skill Council approved by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) or Government
Agency.lf an approved SKP/ Training Provider is not located near the vicinity of College/
Institution, in such case Institution can sign a MoU with the nearby Industry.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 100 ---
For skills component, the Institution/ University may adapt the model curriculum developed
by the concerned Sector Skill Councils, wherever available, in consultation with the industry.
Wherever the curriculum is not available, the same may be developed in consultation with the
relevant Sector Skill Councils and industry. While doing so, they may work towards aligning
the curriculum with the National Occupational Standards (NOS's) being developed by the
respective/allied Sector Skill Councils. This would promote national and global mobility of the
learners, as well as higher acceptability by the industry for employment purposes.

The Curriculum details should be approved by the respective Technical Board/ University.
Institution should focus on

i. | The overall design of the skill development component along with the job roles selected
should be such that it leads to a comprehensive specialization in one or two domains.

ii. In case NOS is not available for a specific area/ job role, the university/college should get
the curriculum for this developed in consultation with industry experts.

iii. The curriculum should also focus on work-readiness in terms of skills in each of the three
years.

iv. Adequate attention needs to be given in curriculum design to practical work, on the job
training, development of student portfolios and project work.

The general education component of the curriculum will also be decided by the Board of Studies
of the concerned affiliating University/ Board. This should adhere to the normal university
standards. It should emphasis and offer Courses which provide holistic development. This may
also include the Course(s) which are supportive to core trade in addition to soft skills, IT skills,
and language proficiency and literature.

The curriculum should be designed in a manner that at the end of year-1, year-2 and year-3,
students are able to meet knowledge and skills for Level 3, 4 and 5 of NSQF Level respectively,
for award of Diploma of Vocation (D.Voc). Similarly, at the end of year-1, year-2 and year-3,
students are able to meet knowledge and skills for Level 5, 6 and 7 of NSOF, for the award of a
Bachelor in Vocation (B.Voc).

A student shall register with an AICTE approved Technical Institution for Diploma in Vocation
(D.Voc) or Bachelor in Vocation (B.Voc) to acquire formal education credits. (For credit framework,
refer to SAMVAY document in AICTE Website @ www.aicte-india.org).

The student completes the skill modules as required at various certification Levels, one Level
at a time, acquires the necessary credits from the Skill Knowledge Provider (SKP) or Training
Provider/ Sector Skill Council approved by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) or
Government Agency or Industry and gives them on to the Institution where he/she is registered
for Diploma in Vocation (D.Voc) or Bachelor in Vocation (B.Voc)

These credits, along with the education component credits are transferred to the Technical
Board or the University as the case may be, which compiles the Vocational Skill credits and the
formal education credits. If all such credits are available as required by the certification Level,
then the Technical Board or the University shall award the certification at that Level.

The candidates may enter the job market after each certification Level or may continue to
acquire additional credits to complete the requirements of Diploma of Vocation (D.Voc) or
Bachelor of Vocation (B.Voc).

All certification Levels of ‘Knowledge and Skill’ have been identified in Appendix 1.

Each Level requires notifying hours of education and training per annum (refer syllabus
structure). For the Vocational stream leading to a Degree/ Diploma/ Post Diploma, these hours
shall have both Vocational and academic component as notified by MoE/AICTE/ UGC. The Skill

modules or the Vocational content at a certification Level could be a single skill or a group of
skills of the number of hours prescribed.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 101 ---
w. Astudent entering a Vocational stream from general stream can enter at a certain Level provided
the skills required at that Level are acquired, from a registered SKP/Training Provider. A suitable
bridge Course where necessary may be run by the Institution for imparting the knowledge to
the student seeking Lateral Entry.

The qualification with upward mobility is given in SAMVAY Document accessible at:
https://www.aicte-india.org/sites/default/files/SAMVAY_1_.pdf.

x. The National Education Policy 2020 states that a candidate shall have freedom to move from
Vocational stream to current formal higher education stream or vice versa at various stages
including multi-Level entry and exit system subject to fulfilling the required criteria of the
affiliating body.

6.2 Registration for Seeking Vocational Education Course(s)

The pre-conditions for seeking approval for Vocational Education Programme(s) leading to Degree or
Diploma in Vocational Education under National Skill Qualification Framework is as given under:

6.2.1 Requirements and Eligibility

a. Any AICTE approved Technical Institution which is, affiliated to respective State Technical
Educational Boards and/or Universities and which has produced atleast two batches successfully
in the relevant branch (Allied domain), is eligible for offering the Vocational Courses.

b. Vocational Education Programme(s) shall be conducted in an AICTE approved Institutions
in the existing Infrastructure as per the norms of Council.

c. The Institution shall have to apply online on AICTE Web-Portal as per the calendar of
AICTE for seeking approval.

d. Thelist of nomenclatures of vocational courses are provided in Appendix 2. AICTE has prepared
the model curriculum for few vocational courses which is available in the AICTE website.

Any Vocational course NOT falling under the purview of AICTE shall necessarily require
approval of concerned regulatory body prior to commencement of the course.

e. Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution to start Diploma/
Degree in Vocational Courses, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

f. The NOC (Format 2) of the respective State Technical Education Boards/ affiliating
Universities for curriculum, evaluation, practical etc. is taken before taking approval from
Council/ starting the Course.

g. The Head of the Institution conducting “Vocational Education Programme” shall be
the “Principal” of the Parent Institution where Vocational Education Programme(s) are
conducted.

h. — All Institutions initially shall be eligible for a maximum of four (4) Sectors/ Specializations
per location, consisting of a maximum 120 students with a batch size of 30 students or (1)
sector/Specialization with maximum intake 120 students with batch size as 120 students.

i. The institutions can also apply for closure/reduction in intake of existing courses and can
apply for vocational courses with sector/specialization upto a maximum of 120 intake

j. If there are no deficiencies, then the Council shall allot the intake applied for, as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook, provided AICTE approval had been granted for same
or allied sector for regular Courses for the Academic Year 2021-22.

k. The existing resources of the Institution including Faculties, Library, Class Rooms,
Laboratories, Computer Centre, etc. shall be used for offering the Vocational Courses.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 102 ---
|. | An MoU shall be signed between the Institution and the SKP as per Format 4.

m. In case, the approved SKP is not located in the vicinity of College/ Institution, then the
Institution can sign an MoU with the nearby SKP/ Training Provider (TP)/ Industry and a
court affidavit of the same, has also to be signed by both the parties. The MoU along with
court affidavit shall be submitted to AICTE at the time of approval.

n. There shall be NO processing fee or TER Charges for introducing/continuing vocational
courses (D.Voc and B.Voc)

6.2.2. Admission, Curriculum and Fee

a. The Institution shall publish in their Brochure and website the details of this scheme and
the specialization offered and approved intake in respective specialization.

b. The Institution shall also display the tuition and other Fee charged by the Institution for
the approved specialization on their brochure & website.

c. The Institution shall invite applications, giving advertisement in newspapers and
publishing the same in the Institution’s website.

d. The Procedure, Rules and Regulations for admission shall be as prescribed by the affiliating
University or Board of Technical Education.

e. The Institution shall upload the student information on AICTE web portal and also
display information regarding admitted candidates in their website for information to the
students and other stakeholders.

f. Admission of students to these seats shall be done on merit basis as per the State
Reservation Policy. Admission will be done as per the academic calendar prescribed by
AICTE in APH as per Appendix 19.

g. The concerned state bodies/ Technical Boards/ Universities shall notify the tuition and
other Fee for candidates to be admitted.

h. Model Structure of the Curricula is available on AICTE Web-Portal. It shall be used as a
guideline and the Institutions may adopt the same with suitable changes as approved by
the affiliating bodies.

6.2.3 Procedure

a. Eligible AICTE approved Institution shall apply for Vocational Education Programme on
AICTE Web-Portal.

b. The online Scrutiny Committee shall verify the eligibility of the Institution for the
Programme and give its recommendation for intake in applied sector and specialization
based on available facility in the Institution.

c. The Scrutiny Committee report shall be placed before the respective Regional Committee.

d. Recommendation of the online Regional Committee shall be uploaded on Web-Portal by
the Regional officer and forwarded to AICTE HQs for further processing and approval as
per the rules.

e. The final approval of Council will be communicated along with the EoA for 2022-23. In
case the applying Institution is not granted EoA for Academic Year 2022-23, the Institution
will not be permitted for conducting Vocational Courses.

6.3 Norms for Extension of Approval (EoA)

a. The approval for Vocational Courses shall be valid for ONE year.

b. In case Institution started the Course in the previous year(s), they have to apply for EoA in the
next year. The procedure for Extension of approval (EoA) shall be same as mentioned in the
APH.

c If approved Institution wishes to change the existing Vocational Courses, the Institution shall

have to apply again for approval.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 103 ---
6.4 Norms for Vocational Education Provider

a. The existing resources of the Institution including Faculty, Library, Class Room, Laboratories,
Computer Centre, etc. shall be used for offering the Vocational Courses subject to the condition
that AICTE approval had been granted for same or allied sector for regular Courses and has
successfully produced two batches.

b. The Faculty student ratio shall be 1:30 or whatever applicable by the respective Board/
University.

c Industry experts or Guest Faculty may be called for supplementing the curriculum as required.

d. Further detailed guidelines to Institutions for offering Vocational Courses is available at: https://

www.aicte-india.org/education/vocational-education.

6.5 Incase of any violation of the above said norms, the same shall be processed as per Chapter VIII
of the Approval Process Handbook

All the Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted preferably in online
mode. Under extraordinary circumstances (including Court directions) the Scrutiny
/ Re-Scrutiny and EVC shall be conducted in Offline mode also. Proceedings
of the Scrutiny /Re-Scrutiny / EVC shall be recorded to have Transparency and
Accountability.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 104 ---
CHAPTER-VII

Norms and Requirements

7.1

7.2
7.3

The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the Technical Programmes such as Diploma/ Post
Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Levels
shall be as provided in the Appendix 1 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Any Foreign National who had obtained School Leaving Certificate/ Diploma/ Degree in a Foreign
Institution shall produce an Equivalency Certificate issued by the Association of Indian Universities for
admission to an Institution/ University in India.

The concerned State Government/ UT Admission Authority shall decide modalities for the admission.

The list of approved nomenclature of Courses at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Programmes in Engineering and Technology/
Planning/Applied Arts and Crafts/Design/Hotel Management and Catering Technology/ MCA/
Management shall be as provided in the Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Sandwich Courses are Degree/ Diploma Courses offered by an Institution that include a set period of
time working in a related Industry so that students get hands-on experience.

7.3.1. Provided that, if any Institution proposes to start a new Course whose nomenclature is not
available in Appendix 2 of the Approval Process Handbook, prior concurrence, as the case
may be, by the Council for the same shall be necessary. For such concurrence, the Institution
with due endorsement by the Registrar/ Director of affiliating University/ Board/ Technical
Institution shall submit detailed Syllabus and Curriculum and its nomenclature to the Policy
and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE before 30th September of the Calendar Year, to process
the same in the respective Board.

7.3.2 All branches of Engineering and Technology shall offer Elective Courses in the Emerging/
Multidisciplinary Areas viz., Artificial Intelligence (Al), Internet of Things (loT), Block chain,
Robotics, Quantum Computing, Data Sciences, Cyber Security, 3D Printing and Design,
Augmented Reality/ Virtual Reality (AR/VR) etc., as specified in Appendix 2 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

a. Under Graduate Degree Courses in Emerging / Multidisciplinary Areas shall be allowed
as specialization from the same department. The minimum additional Credits for such
Courses shall be in the range of 18-20 (including credit transferred from the SWAYAM
platform) and the same shall be mentioned in the degree, as specialization in that
particular area. For example, doing extra credits for Robotics in Mechanical Engineering
shall earn B.E./B.Tech. (Hons.) Mechanical Engineering with specialization in Robotics.

b. Minor specialization in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary Areas in Under Graduate Degree
Courses may be allowed where a student of another Department shall take the minimum
additional Credits in the range of 18-20 and get a degree with minor from another
Department.

c. Universities are free to evolve their own Syllabus for any Minor Degree / Hons. for which
Model Syllabus is not available on AICTE’s Website.

d. If an Institution is having the required Infrastructure facilities, Faculty and other
requirements as per the Approval Process Handbook, for conducting the Core (Under
Graduate Degree) Courses, the specialization in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary Areas shall
be permitted Within The Approved Intake Without Hampering The Generic Course.

e. The Institutions/ Universities shall adopt the following important instruction while
offering the Minor Degrees/Hons. in Emerging/ Multidisciplinary Areas:

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 105 ---
1 | Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Machine Learning Engineering; Electronics Engineering
2 | Blockchain Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
3 | Cyber Security Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
4 |Data Science Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
5 |Internet of Things (loT) Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering; Electronics Engineering
6 | Virtual and Augmented Reality | Computer Science and Engineering; Electronics Engineering
7 | Systems Engineering Electronics Engineering; Mechanical Engineering
8 |Control Systems and Sensors | Electronics Engineering; Instrumentation and Control Engineering
Technology
9 |GIS and Remote Sensing Electronics Engineering; Civil Engineering
10 | Sustainability Engineering Civil Engineering
11 | Green Technology and Civil Engineering; Chemical Engineering
Sustainability Engineering
12 | Strategic Civil Infrastructure | Civil Engineering
13 | Coastal & Offshore Civil Engineering
Engineering
14 |Smart Cities Civil Engineering; Electronics Engineering
15 | Construction Technology Civil Engineering
16 |Underground Space Civil Engineering
Utilization
17 |Computer Science & Biology _| Biotechnology; Computer Science
18 |Biosimilar Technology Biotechnology; Chemical Engineering
19 |Genome Engineering and Biotechnology
Technology
20 |Precision Health Technology _ | Biotechnology
21  |Waste Technology Chemical Engineering
22 | Energy Engineering Mechanical Engineering
23 | Electrical and Computer Electrical Engineering; Computer Science and Engineering
Engineering
24 |Mining and Mineral Mining Engineering
Processing
25 | Robotics Mechanical Engineering; Electronics and Communication
Engineering;Electronics Engineering;
26 |3D Printing Mechanical Engineering; Civil Engineering
27 | Electric Vehicles Mechanical Engineering; Electrical Engineering
28 | Sensors Technology Electronics and Communication Engineering, Electronics
Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Instrumentation
Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 106 ---
29 | Microgrid Technologies Electrical Engineering

30 | Infrastructure Engineering Civil Engineering

31 | Environmental Geotechnology | Civil Engineering

32 | Earthquake Engineering Civil Engineering

33 | Waterways Transport Civil Engineering
Engineering

34 |Lean Construction Technology | Civil Engineering

35 | Organ Printing Technology Biotechnology

36 | Nutrition Technology Biotechnology

37 | Drug Engineering Biotechnology

38 | Aqua-food Technology Chemical Engineering; Biotechnology

39 | Cellular Agriculture Biotechnology

40 | Sustainable Energy Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
Engineering (SEE)

41 | Universal Human Values (UHV) | Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology

42 | Indian Knowledge System Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology
(IKS)

43

Advance Web Development __| Applicable to any discipline of Engineering and Technology

7.4

7.5

7.6

7.7

7.8

7.9

Areas in which Minor Degree/Hons. may be offered are numerous. It is up to the Universities with the
help of their Academic Board/Council to decide whether Minor Degree/Hons. is to be offered or not in
any particular area, which is not mentioned above. AICTE approval is not required for offering Minor
Degree/Hons. in any such area, however the criteria that “Minor Degree or Hons. will cumulatively
require additional 18 to 20 credits in the specified area in addition to the credits essential for obtaining
the Under Graduate Degree in Major Discipline (i.e. 160 credits)”.

To maintain the quality of Education, 60% of the eligible courses in any Technical Institution shall be
accredited in the next TWO (2) years’ time, else EoA shall not be issued by the Council.

The “Maximum Intake Allowed” in a new Technical Institution offering Technical Programme(s) at
Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree Level shall be as per the Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook. The same shall also be
applicable to an existing Institution WITHOUT NBA accreditation.

The Council shall permit the Introduction/ Continuation of NRI/ OCI /FN/ Children of Indian Workers in
the Gulf Countries seats ONLY in the Courses conducted in regular mode.

The Council shall not permit the Post Graduate Course(s) (except MCA and Management), if the
Institution is not offering an Under Graduate (Core) Course in the same Programme. However, the same
is permitted to State/ Central Universities or Autonomous Government Institutions offering only Post
Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology.

The Council shall NOT permit the conduct of PGDM Courses along with other Programs in the same
Institution.

In general, the teaching learning process shall take place either in the form of “face to face” mode in
a class room (Regular Course) or “Open and Distance Learning” mode by providing flexible learning
using a print, electronic, MOOCs, SWAYAM and SWAYAM PRABHA and through online and occasional
interactive face-to-face meetings.

The Courses offered in the timings of Regular Shift, Second Shift and Part Time shall be considered
as Regular Courses. The Institutions shall have to fulfill all facilities such as Infrastructure, Faculty and
other requirements to offer the Regular Courses as per the norms specified in the Approval Process
Handbook 21-22 for the Total Approved Intake and the Institutions may conduct the Courses in the
timings of Regular Shift, First Shift, Second Shift and Part Time not exceeding the “Approved Intake” of

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 107 ---
each Course, as per the convenience of all stakeholders. All such Institutions shall have to create the
necessary Faculty, Infrastructure and other facilities WITHIN 1 YEAR (by A/Y 2022-23) to fulfil the norms
and an affidavit for the same shall have to be submitted to AICTE. Student enrolment details shall be
uploaded in the Web-Portal.

The Institutions may run Skill Development Courses, student developmental activities such as Research
Park, Start-up Centre, Innovation Club, Entrepreneurship, etc. in the excess Built-up area without
affecting the regular academic activities.

The AICTE approved Institutions shall be permitted to collaborate with each other for Student Exchange
Programme so that the students admitted in an Institution may spend one Semester in another
Institution.

Further, the institutions running courses of a specialized nature with more than 50 years of existence and
unable to modify/improve/change infrastructure (heritage building), such institutions’ infrastructural /
faculty etc. calculation shall be done on their “existing intake”. Such institutions shall NOT be subjected
to the prevalent norms of infrastructure as prescribed by the Council for other institutions. However, the
faculty norms for such institutions shall be kept on a pro-rata basis and not on the basis of division size
intake as prescribed in Appendix 3.

An Institution shall only allow up to 40% or as per the new regulation of UGC /AICTE of the total courses
being offered in a particular Programme in a Semester through the Online Learning courses provided
through SWAYAM/ MOOCs platform as per the AICTE (Credit Framework for online learning course
through SWAYAM) Regulations, 2016 as amended from time to time.

Institutes having less Enrolment / Poor Academic Performance
a) Institutions having less enrolment

Institutions having Course(s) in which admissions are less than 30% of the “Approved Intake”
for the consecutive past 5 years consistently, and if in the following year, the admitted student
strength does not exceed 50% of the “Approved Intake” in the course(s) by filling vacant seats
through lateral entry, then the Council shall reduce the intake by 50%, in such Course(s) in the
current Academic Year.

In the Courses approved by the Council, if the Institution fails to admit the students/ not
started the Course(s) due to Non-affiliation by the University/ Board or Non-Fulfilment of State
Government/ UT requirements in the year of establishment, the same shall be informed to the
Council, else ALL the Courses shall be considered for implementing the above Clause.

The Institution falling under this category need not apply for restoration in the next Academic
Year and the Intake shall be automatically reinstated by the Council, if the enrolment becomes
more than 30% based on the student enrolment data provided by the Institution. However,
such Institutions shall not be eligible to apply for other categories listed under Chapter II/ III/V/
VI of the Approval Process Handbook except Extension of Approval.

Further, if such Institutions apply for restoration of Intake against the punitive action if any, in
the previous Academic Year(s) and if the earlier “Approved Intake” being restored through EVC
followed by SHC/ SAC, then this Clause shall be applied after five years.

b) Institutions having poor academic performance:

Institutes having poor academic performance in University/Board examinations, ajoint decision
of respective affiliating University / Board along with AICTE shall be taken. The institute with
poor academic performance shall be given a warning to improve the academic performance
of the students within 2 years.

7.14 Admission to Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s)

a) Lateral Entry to Second Year Diploma Course(s) shall be permissible up to a maximum of 10% of
the “Approved Intake” which shall be over and above, supernumerary to the “Approved Intake’,
plus the unfilled vacancies of the First year as specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 108 ---
b) Lateral Entry to Second Year Under Graduate Degree Course as applicable in Appendix 1 shall
be permissible up to a maximum of 10% of the “Approved Intake” which shall be over and
above, supernumerary to the “Approved Intake’, plus the unfilled vacancies of the First year as
specified in the Approval Process Handbook.

©) The Institution applied for Closure (if the same is under process/ approved for Progressive
Closure) are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year, as Extension
of Approval was issued in the previous Academic Year and students were admitted during that
year.

d) The Institutions where “No Admission” have been issued for the current Academic Year
are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year, as Extension of
Approval was issued in the previous Academic Year and students were admitted during that
year. However, in the Institutions where “No Admission” have been issued for the previous
Academic Year are not eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry in the current Academic Year.

e) Institutions applied for the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level and vice-versa/
Conversion of Women’s Institution to Co-ed Institution and vice-versa and approved for the
conversion are eligible for admission to the Lateral Entry as per the approval that of the previous
Academic Year.

f) Any Foreign National obtained Diploma in a Foreign Institution (having an equivalency
Certificate issued by the Association of Indian Universities) or Diploma in an Indian Institution
shall also be eligible for Lateral Entry into the Second Year under Graduate Degree Course. The
Institutions having approval for the supernumerary seats in such Course(s) as per Clause 2.12
of the Approval Process Handbook are ONLY eligible to admit the Foreign Nationals as per the
norms, else the Institution shall apply for the same on AICTE Web-Portal. However, the total
Foreign Nationals admitted under supernumerary seats and the Lateral Entry shall not exceed
the 15% of the “Approved Intake” in an Academic year.

g) NRI candidates shall also be permitted for admission in Lateral Entry to Second Year, subject to
the approval from AICTE for the NRI seats and fulfilment of requisite norms as specified in the
Approval Process Handbook.

h) Vacant seats arising out of the students withdrawing the admission in the First Year shall also
be considered for Lateral Entry.

The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Faculty requirements and Cadre ratio at Under
Graduate/ Post Graduate Level as provided in the Appendix 7 of the Approval Process Handbook.

The Institutions shall ensure the timely and complete payment of the salary of Faculty by Electronic
Clearing Service through Nationalized Banks. Expert Visit Committee shall ensure the Faculty availability
by the annual salary paid statements of the faculty in addition to their physical presence.

The Institution should not demand for the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at the
time of joining the Institution. The Faculty members shall avoid the practice of leaving an Institution in
the middle of the semester without completing the Courses assigned to them in the Semester.

The institutions shall ensure that necessary addition/deletion of faculty ID (Details in case of new faculty

have not worked in any other AICTE approved institutions so far) on AICTE web portal within the same

month from the date of Joining/Leaving.

a) In the following Programmes, the Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Person as per guidelines given
in Annexure 9 of the Approval Process Handbook are permissible (up to a maximum as
mentioned below), as the Programmes require more practical exposure :

Design - 20%

Planning - 30%

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 109 ---
7.16

In all other Programmes, ONLY under exigent conditions such as relieving/retirement of
Faculty members/ delay in Faculty recruitment, Institutions may avail the services of Adjunct
Faculty/ Resource Person up to a maximum of 10% of the required Faculty members as per
the “Approved Intake”, for a period not exceeding one Academic Session. The Institutions may
appoint more number of Adjunct Faculty for the benefit of the students to get the Industrial
exposure. One Adjunct Faculty shall not be engaged in not more than two Institutions at the
same time.

b) In order to offer Quality Technical Education, all the institutions need to have Regular faculty
for all the programs / courses by fulfilling Faculty student's ratio & Cadre ratio as prescribed by
AICTE from time to time. However, the institutions may avail the services of contractual faculty
under extraordinary circumstances (Court Cases etc.,) ONLY for a short period.

©) The Faculty norms as specified in Appendix 7 of Approval Process Handbook shall be fulfilled
for the Course(s) conducted in any institution.

d) For every Post Graduate Course, there should be at least one Professor with Ph.D. qualification.
If Professor is not available, at least one Associate professor with Ph.D. qualification should be
available.

e) Faculty requirement for a Course may comprise of Faculty of Science and Humanities and other

interdisciplinary specialization depending on the University Curriculum.

f) Number of Technical and Non-Teaching Staff depends on the Institution/ University/ concerned
Government norms.

g) Aadhaar/ PAN seeding has to be provided for the Faculty wherever applicable as per the Norms.

h) The Technical Institutions shall introduce Biometric attendance for regular Faculty members.

i) Each Institution shall have appropriate Grievance Redressal mechanism/ Internal Complaint

Committee (ICC) to address the issues of the Faculty & Students.
Disclaimer:

Annexure 6 and 7 of the Approval Process Handbook provide the major domains and
the corresponding possible nomenclatures under each domain which is applicable to
AICTE approved Institutions. Inter disciplinary Courses are numerous and more firmly
entrenched in the academy than ever. Such Courses are being offered at various
Universities, IITs, NITs, IISERs, NISERs and other Institutes of National importance, other than
the nomenclatures listed in the Approval Process Handbook and AICTE cannot update all
the existing nomenclatures. However, the recruiting authorities shall decide the equivalent
Course(s) based on the curricula and syllabus, without taking approval from AICTE, depending
on the needs of their Programme(s)/ Course(s).

The Technical Institutions shall follow Faculty Cadre and Qualifications as provided in the Appendix 8
of the Approval Process Handbook.

The age of superannuation of all faculty members and Principal / Director of the Institutions shall be
65 years. An extension of 5 years (till the attainment of 70 years of age) may be given to those faculty
members who are physically fit, have written Technical Books, published papers and has average 360°
feedback of more than 8 out of 10 indicating them being active during last 3 preceding years of service.

All the pay related issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the concerned State Government.
(Refer AICTE Gazette: F.NO. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated 22"4 March, 2021)

The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Land and Built-up requirements as provided in
Appendix 4 of the Approval Process Handbook.

a) Land as required with clear title shall be in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, in case
of Institutions. However, in case of the Institution Deemed to be Universities (Private)/ Private
Universities, Land shall be under the undisputed ownership and possession of the University.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 110 ---
b) Documents showing ownership of Land/ Building as per the provisions of Section 8 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the time being in force relating to transfer
of property to or by Companies, Associations or bodies of individuals, in the name of the
Applicant in the form of Registered Settlement Deed/ Registered Sale Deed/ Irrevocable Gift
Deed (Registered)/ Irrevocable Government/ Private Lease Deed (Registered) for a period of
minimum 30 years (including Commitment for continued lease with at least live Lease of the
maximum duration of programs at the time of submission of application). However, Private
Lease of Building is permissible ONLY for Mega/ Metro Cities due to the scarcity of Land and in case
of highly skilled and employable courses.

c) It shall be open for the Promoter Trust/ Society/ Company of the proposed Institution to
mortgage the Land with the prior intimation to AICTE after the issue of the Letter of Approval
(LoA), only for raising the resources for the purpose of development of the Technical Institution
situated on that Land for improving the employability of students.

d) Plot(s) of Land under consideration shall be contiguous and shall have no obstacles such as
river, canals, rail tracks, highways, high tension lines or any such entity hampering continuity
of Land. In case, if the obstacles come later, connectivity shall be ensured and proper Safety
Certificate should be produced from Competent Authority.

e) The Land Use Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as designated by
concerned State Government/ UT.

f) The Land Conversion Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as designated
by concerned State Government/ UT.

g) The Land Classification Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority as
designated by concerned State Government/ UT.

h) The Buildings has to be constructed as per the approved Building plan. In the existing
Institutions, the outer dimensions and outer envelope of the building, setbacks, vertical
circulation position of the toilets and circulation areas are to be kept intact; the minor internal
changes made in the plan may be accepted. However, major changes/ alterations that affect
the structural stability of the Building are not permitted.

i) Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D (as applicable) shall
be obtained from the Competent Authority (as per standard format prescribed by the issuing
Authority). For Government Buildings, the Government Building Act, 1899 is applicable.

j) After the expiry of a period of thirty years from the issue of Completion Certificate, a Structural
Stability Certificate from the registered Structural Engineer for the purpose of certifying that
the Building is safe for human habitation shall be produced. Structural Stability Certificate is
valid for a period of FIVE years from the date of issue.

k) In case of any modifications done in existing Building, stability of entire construction need to
be checked and also Building Plan need to be re-validated, in case of major changes.

I) A valid Fire Safety Certificate shall be obtained from the Competent Authority.

m) State wise Competent Authorities for issuing the Certificates pertaining to the Land/ Building

including Occupancy Certificate are given in Annexure 8 of the Approval Process Handbook.
7.18 The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software, Internet,
Printers and Laboratory Equipment as provided in the Appendix 5 of the Approval Process Handbook.

7.19 The Technical Institutions shall follow Norms for Essential and Desirable requirements as provided in
the Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook.

a) The Language Laboratory shall be used for Language tutorials. These are attended by students
who voluntarily opt for remedial English Classes. Lessons and exercises are recorded on a
weekly basis so that the students are exposed to a variety of listening and speaking drills. These
especially benefits students who are deficient in English and also aim at confidence-building

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 111 ---
for facing interviews and competitive examinations. The Language Laboratory sessions also
include word games, quizzes, extemporary speaking, debates, skills, etc. Specifications shall be
decided course wise as mentioned in Appendix 4.2.1.

b) The Institution should provide appropriate facilities to take care of the physically challenged
students and elderly persons comprising of Teaching/ Non-Teaching/ Others such as parents of
the students visiting the Institution. Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled/ elderly persons
shall be available on all the floors and in ALL the Buildings, including the availability of specially
designed toilets for Ladies and Gents. Refer Design Manual for a Barrier Free Environment
available in AICTE Website @ www.aicte-india.org.

Every Building should have at least one entrance accessible to the physically challenged and
shall be indicated with a proper signage. This entrance shall be approached through a ramp
together with the stepped entry. Refer guidelines and space standards for Barrier Free Built
Environment for disabled and elderly persons by CPWD, Ministry of Urban Development,
Government of India (Refer Handbook on Barrier free and Accessibility http://cpwd.gov.in).
Unisex toilets with all facilities shall be provided in each floor as specified by the National
Building Code.

Condition A: for Building up to 3 or 4 floors (for Buildings of height upto15 m)
+ The Lift may be provided, but not essential.
+ The ramp shall be provided as per National Building Code.

Condition B: If the Building is a multi-storied Building i.e. more than 4 floors (for Buildings of
height more than 15 m)

+ Lift must be provided with all provisions as per the National Building Code. Lift shall be
accessible to all disabled/ elderly persons and

. Ramps may be provided, if needed, for the same.
+ Special reserved car parking facilities are to be provided.
©) Other types of Barrier Free Environment

+ Stair lifts: All Stair Lifts come standard with a switch or button at the armrest and a call/
send button mounted on the wall at the top or bottom of the stair case this allows multiple
user household's access to the unit as necessary.

+ Platform Lifts also known as “porch lifts” come in all shapes and sizes: Platform Lifts are
ideal for individuals that rely on wheelchairs, power chairs and scooters. Vertical Platform
Lifts also provide access to raised porches and decks for the wheel chair, power chair or
scooter.

+ There are several types of hoisting systems such as Overhead Hoists, Portable Ceiling Lifts,
Mobile Floor Hoists and Wall Lift Hoists are also available.

+ Safety Certificate is essential.
d) Safety and Security measures in the Campus

The essential responsibility of Campus safety is to safeguard students, Staff, and the general
Campus community from the threat of violence, and to provide appropriate interventions to
support individuals in crisis. To ensure the safety in the Campus, the following measures shall
be available in the Institution:

+ CCTV shall be installed in the Campus at appropriate locations within the premises of an
Institution.

+ — All Inhabitants/ Students/ Faculty/ Staff shall be issued Identity Cards by the Institution
and the same may be checked by the security personnel during their entry. Outsiders
may be permitted to enter into the Campus with the temporary photo ID generated at the
entrance.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 112 ---
7.22

7.26

7.27
7.28

7.31

7.32

7.33

7.35

The staff shall be trained to protect the students from any abuse.

The Institution shall have at least an annual safety programme encouraging the Campus
community to look out for themselves and one another.

Special needs of students, Faculty and Staff with disabilities have to be taken care in the
event of an emergency.

Counseling arrangements for the affected individuals shall be provided.

e) Multiple Institutions in the same premises run by the same Trust/ Society/ Company shall be
permitted to share internet band width/ e-journals, but the sum total shall be equivalent to the
requirement of each of the Individual Institutions.

Induction training for 3 weeks and 2 weeks is mandatory for First Year UG and Diploma students
respectively.

Model Structure of the Curricula/ Syllabus for different Course(s) are proposed by the Council and
available in AICTE Web-Portal shall be used as a guideline and Institutions/ Universities may adopt the
same with suitable changes.

The Technical Institutions shall initiate MoUs with the Industries for the internships of the students and
report the outcomes of the same in their website. The industry with whom MoU is signed shall be a
registered industry having valid TIN/GST number.

The standalone PGDM Institutions shall follow Norms for PGDM Programmes as provided in the
Appendix 9 of the Approval Process Handbook.

The Technical Institutions shall follow Subscription of Journals as provided in the Appendix 10 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the establishment of a new Technical Institution shall be as
provided in the Appendix 11 of the Approval Process Handbook.

The Technical Institutions shall follow Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging as provided in the
Appendix 12 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Structure of Various Committees is given in the Appendix 13 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Contact details of the Regional Offices of AICTE are mentioned in the Appendix 14 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

The Technical Institutions shall follow Grievance Redressal for Students as provided in the Appendix 15
of the Approval Process Handbook.

Documents to be submitted for applications under Chapter | are given in Appendix 16 of the Approval
Process Handbook.

Documents to be submitted for applications under Chapter II/ Ill are given in Appendix 17 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

Recommended Composition of Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) in the Technical
Institutions is given in the Appendix 18 of the Approval Process Handbook. Institutions Deemed to
be Universities shall fulfill the composition of Board of Governors/ Board of Management (BoM) as
specified by the AICTE and UGC.

The Technical Institutions shall follow Academic Calendar as specified in the Appendix 19 of the
Approval Process Handbook.

The Technical Institutions may conduct the Fellow Programme in Management as specified in the
Appendix 20 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Starting other academic Course(s)/ Institutions (Technical/ Non-Technical) in the excess Built-up area,
arising out of the Courses approved for Closure, not started, etc., is permissible. However, the Applicant

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 113 ---
has to make Material/ Non-Material amendment of the Building Plan, Site Plan, etc. approved by the
concerned Competent Authority to suit the requirements of the new Programme.

The Institutions may also conduct any academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body using existing
facilities, or by creating additional facilities as per the provisions laid down in the norms and standards
of the respective Regulatory Bodies without affecting the quality of education prescribed by both
Regulatory Bodies after taking NOC from the Council. In such cases, a Scrutinity/Re-scrutiny Committee
shall be conducted for the issue of NOC on receipt of € 0.5 Lakh through online as TER Charges by the
Applicant. The Promoter has to provide an Affidavit 12 that the Institution(s) approved by AICTE in the
Campus has/ have all the facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel (if applicable), Faculty, etc. for meeting
the ALL the Courses, in addition to the proposed academic Course(s).

7.36 Ample space shall be made available for playground in an Institution. Institutions shall provide
owned/ hired facilities for indoor and outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or through
arrangements with other adjacent Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.

7.37 Total Built-Up area under each sub-categories such as Instructional area, Administrative area, Amenities
area and Circulation area for each Programme shall be fulfilled. Built-Up area in excess than the total
Built-up area required to run the Programme (s) and Course(s) for the entire duration shall be utilized
for the student developmental activities such as Hostel, Research Park, Student Clubs and Incubator/
Accelerator.

7.38 Mandatory disclosures as given in the Annexure 10 shall be displayed in the website of each Technical
Institution.

7.39 The Institutions shall adopt the minimum standards and qualifications as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook. However, Institutions Deemed to be Universities/ Institutions having Accreditation/
Autonomy status shall surpass the minimum standard and qualifications specified.

7.40 In National Defence/ Security areas, the maximum Divisions or Intake over and above specified in
Appendix 3 of the Approval Process Handbook shall be considered as the case may be, subject to the
fulfilment of other norms of the Approval Process Handbook. However, the details of such Institutions
may not be shared to the public.

7.41 The lnstitutions shall adopt the Fee fixed by the concerned State Fee Regulatory authority. However, the
authorities shall take into account the Central Pay Commission emoluments, increase in DA from time
to time, etc. while fixing the Fee for various Courses. Institutions Deemed to be Universities shall comply
the UGC norms for Fee in Professional Education.

NOTE: The Institutions shall not directly or indirectly, demand or charge or accept, Capitation Fee or
demand any donation, by way of consideration for admission to any seat in any Course.

7.42 Those Institutions applied for the NBA having Extension of Approval with full “Approved Intake” for
consecutive six years and granted a reduction in Intake in that current Academic Year shall request
AICTE, if all the deficiencies are complied with. Such requests shall be processed as per the norms of the
Approval Process Handbook and on fulfilment; the NBA shall be intimated suitably.

7.43 AICTE does not recognize the Programme(s)/ Course(s) in Technical Education offered through ODL/
Online mode except in Management/Computer Application and Travel & Tourism / Artificial Intelligence
& Data Science / Logistics Programmes with the explicit approval of AICTE.

7.44 The State Government/ UT/ Directorate of Technical Education/ Directorate of Medical Education shall
ensure that 10% of reservation for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) as per the reservation policy for
admission, operational from the Academic year 2019-20 without affecting the reservation percentages
of SC/ ST/ OBC/ General. However, this would not be applicable in the case of Minority Institutions
referred to the Clause (1) of Article 30 of Constitution of India.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 114 ---
Such Institution shall be permitted to increase the annual permitted strength beginning with the Academic
Year 2019-20 as depicted below:

IMPLEMENTATION OF 10% RESERVATION TO EWS:

ILLUSTRATION FOR SANCATIONED INTAKE OF 60 AND 120

INTRODUCTION of EWS

Category % Intake Round off Category %
SC 15 9 9 SC 15
ST 7.5 45 5 ST 7.5
OBC 27 16.2 16 OBC 27
Gen 50.5 30.3 30 Gen 40.5
100 60 60 EWS 10
100
To maintain GEN : 50.5, Multiplication Factor is 1.25, i.e. 50.5/40.5
Category % Revised % Intake 60 Intake 120
SC 15 18.75 11.25 22.5
ST 7.5 9.375 5.625 11.25
OBC 27 33.75 20.25 40.5
Gen 40.5 50.625 30.375 60.75
EWS 10 12.5 7.5 15
100 125 75 150

NOTE: EWS vacant seats shall be considered for the Lateral Entry to Second Year Course(s) with the same
reservation policy for admission.

7.45

7.46

7.47

7.48

7.49

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

(a) Supernumerary seats (25 Nos.) are granted by the Council, for the Institutions falling under the
Centrally Supported Scheme of “Upgrading existing Polytechnics to integrate Persons with Benchmark
Disability (PWBD)” in the mainstream of Technical and Vocational Education.

(b) Concession for the wards of Kashmiri Migrants and Kashmiri Pandit / Kashmiri Hindu Families (Non-
Migrants) living in Kashmir valley for admission in Higher Educational Institutions (As per MoE directives:
F.No, 3-4/2017-NER, Dated: 15" October, 2019). This is in addition to PMSSS supernumerary seats. They
are not eligible for scholarship

Affidavit 2 specified in the Approval Process Handbook shall be uploaded in the AICTE Web-Portal in
e-stamp paper with digital signature of the authorized signatories.

In case of any litigation pertaining to the penal action initiated by the Council for an Institution,
for the contravention of any of the relevant Regulations, such Institution shall have to apply as per
Clause 8.1(b) / 8.18 (as applicable) in AICTE Web-Portal, in the absence of any specific court order to
the contrary.

Clause 1.5.4 of the Approval Process Handbook does not permit Self-financing Institutions to use
‘Indian; ‘National; etc. in the Name of the Institution. The Institutions which were already given approval
with those words shall be instructed to change/ drop the word from the Name of the Institution, as the
Stake holders may misinterpret them to be Government/ Government Aided Institutions.

If any Institution (other than Government/ Government Aided) continue to use ‘Indian’, ‘National; etc. in
the Name of the Institution, the Council shall remove such words while issuing EoA.

Tuition Fee Waiver (TFW) Scheme

a) Scheme shall be applicable to all approved Technical Institutions offering Diploma, Post
Diploma, Under Graduate Programme(s), MCA, PGCM MBA, PGDM Programme(s) and Lateral
Entry provisions of these Programme(s).

b) The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council.
©) Requirements and Eligibility
+ Sons/ Daughters of parents whose annual income from all sources does not exceed %. 8.00 Lakh.

+ — The Waiver is limited to the Tuition Fee as approved by the State Level Fee Committee
for Self-Financing Institutions and by the Government for the Government/ Government
aided Institutions. All other Fees except Tuition Fee shall have to be paid by the beneficiary.
--- Page 115 ---
d) Admission Procedure

+ Under this Scheme, up to a maximum of 5% of “Approved Intake” per Course shall be
available for this admission. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature. These
supernumerary seats shall be available only to such Course(s) in an Institution, where a
minimum of 50% of “Approved Intake’ are filled up in last Academic year

+ The Competent Authority to effect this admission is the State Government/ UT or its
designated authority.

+ — Inthe event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to
any other category of candidates.

+ The State Admission Authority shall invite applications under this category; make a
separate merit list for this category and effect admission on the basis of the merit list so
generated.

+ — The Institutions shall publish in their Brochure and Web site the details of this scheme.

+ Competent Authority for admission shall submit a separate list of the students admitted
under this category to the Institution to which they are admitted for compliance.

+ — Aletter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to
change the Institution/ Course under any circumstances.

+ — The Institutions shall also display information regarding admitted candidates in their Web
site for information to the students and other stakeholders.

7.50 Supernumerary seats for the Union Territories J&K and Ladakh under Prime Minister's Special Scholarship
Scheme (PMSSS)

a) Scheme shall be applicable to selected approved Technical Institutions having NIRF ranking
and offering Bachelor Programme(s). Diploma holders in Engineering are eligible for Lateral
Entry under the provisions of these Programme(s).

b) 2 seats per Course shall be available for these admission with the maximum of 10 seats
per Institution. These seats shall be supernumerary in nature and shall be available to such
Course(s) in an Institution.

©) The scheme shall be mandatory for all Institutions approved by the Council subject to, the
changes suggested by the Inter-Ministerial Committee of MoE from time to time.

d) Requirements and Eligibility
+ — All students domicile of J&K and Ladakh are eligible for seats under this scheme.

. The student passed Higher Secondary Examination (12" Std.) from the schools located in
J&K and Ladakh.

+ Sons/ Daughters of parents whose annual income from all sources does not exceed & 8.00 Lakh.
e) Admission Procedure

+ AICTE shall invite applications under this category, make a separate merit list for this
category and effect admission based on the merit list as generated through Counselling
or otherwise as decided from time to time.

+ — Inthe event of non-availability of students in this category, the same shall not be given to
any other category of Applicants.

+ — Aletter in this respect shall be issued by the Competent Authority for admission to each
beneficiary student admitted under this scheme and he/ she shall not be allowed to
change the Institution/ Course under any circumstances without permission from AICTE.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 116 ---
7.51 Release of Security Deposit
7.51.1 Procedure

a) The Trust/ Society/ Company shall upload/ submit the following documents in AICTE
Web-Portal for the release of the FDR/ RTGS.

Application/ request letter of the Institution for FDR/ RTGS release

Affidavit 6 with details of the Institution and Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, FDR/
RTGS details (as per the standard format)

Copy of FDR to be released, in a corpus fund made by RPGF, copy(s) of the Demand Draft (if
any) submitted to AICTE for creation of RPGF/ Online payment proof for Security Deposit

b) Regional Office after verification shall forward the same to the Approval Bureau, Public
Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) and Vigilance Cell of AICTE to give their clearance for the
release of the FDR.

c) In case of FDR/ RPGF, upon clearance from all the above, NOC shall be issued to the
Institution by the Regional Officer.

d) Incase of RTGS, the sanction order shall be issued by the Council.

7.51.2 If an Institution has any financial embezzlement with Government Bodies/ Banks, then Security
Deposit shall not be released till the NOC from such body is received.

7.51.3 Incase an Institution/Trust/ Society/ Company violates the Security Deposit related norms, the
Council shall initiate appropriate penal action.

7.51.4 For the Institutions approved by AICTE and later converted into a Private University/Institution
Deemed to be University by appropriate State/ Central Act, the release of Security Deposit shall
be subject to no pending Complaints or Disciplinary Proceedings against such Institutions in
addition to the submission of the above documents.

7.51.5 For the Institutions approved for Progressive Closure (Institutional/Program specific), Security
Deposit (as applicable) shall be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company,
subject to the submission of a Certificate from the affiliating University/Board stating that no
students are studying in the Institution. Such a Certificateis not needed, if the Security Deposit
is already matured.

7.51.6 In case of grant of approval to the merger of Institutions, Security Deposit of the Child
Institution(s) shall be released upon the request from the Trust/ Society/ Company, subject to
the submission of a Certificate from the affiliating University/Board stating that no students are
studying in the Institution.

7.52 Two Supernumerary seats shall be accorded by AICTE in its approved institutions for empowering

Gifted & Talented students to seek admissions against these seats, which will provide a motivating and
unique opportunity for such students in line with NEP recommendations.

AICTE shall devise norms for selection of Gifted & Talented Students under supernumerary quota and
final admission shall be approved by AICTE.

7.53 To facilitate limited and conditional capacity creation based on the following guidelines: It is observed
that a few institutions have reported more than 100% enrolments in 2021. A number of institutes have
reported >80% enrolments. Extra capacities shall be permitted to institutions with good NIRF ranking
(<100) that have reported >80% enrolments last three years as below:

i) 95-100% enrolments — additional capacity of 25% be permitted
ii) 80-95% enrolments - additional capacity of 15% may be permitted
7.54 PMCARES for Children Scheme 2021

PM CARES for Children Scheme has been launched by the Prime Minister for taking care of children who
lost both parents during the COVID pandemic. Such childrens who are issued “PM CARES Certificate”
shall be eligible for admission in Polytechnic Institutions under Supernumerary quota. They shall be
eligible for SWANATH Scholarship. Their shall be two supernumerary seats per course per institute.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 117 ---
CHAPTER-VIII
Penal Action in case of Violation of the Norms and Regulations

8.1 Introduction

a. An Institution offering any Programme/ Course in Technical Education in violation of
Regulations/ Approval Process Handbook, shall be liable to appropriate Penal action including
fine/ no admission/ reduction in “Approved Intake”/ Withdrawal of Approval/ criminal action by
the Council against defaulting Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated Individuals/ the Institution,
as the case may be.

b. If any Technical Institution contravenes any of the provisions of relevant Regulations, the
Council after making appropriate inquiry through Standing Hearing Committee and after
providing an opportunity of being heard through the Standing Appellate Committee shall
withdraw the approval granted. In case of Withdrawal of Approval of the Institution, the
Technical Institution/Trust/ Society/ Company shall apply afresh for approval after completion
of two Academic Years for setting up a new Technical Institution with a different name as per
the procedure defined in the Approval Process Handbook

c Further that, the students admitted to the Institution whose approval has been withdrawn for
the current Academic Year shall be redistributed to other AICTE approved Institutions in the
jurisdiction of the affiliating University/ Board by the Competent Authority of the respective
State Government/ UT. AICTE approval given to the Course(s) in the previous Academic Year(s),
if any, to such Institution against which the admitted students shall be treated as AICTE
approved Course(s) only.

d. If any of the information mentioned in the Affidavit is proved as false, penal action shall be
initiated on the Deponent.

e. If any Institution is found offering Technical Programmes without the approval of the Council,
it shall be declared as unapproved Institution and necessary punitive action shall be initiated
such as the Council shall inform respective State Government/ UT to initiate appropriate penal,
civil/ criminal action against such defaulting Institutions/Trust/ Society/ Company/ Associated
Individuals as the case maybe.

8.2. Non-Submission/ Submission of Incomplete/ False/Incorrect Information/Violation of Regulatory
Provisions in Online Application for Extension of Approval

Non-Submission/ submission of incomplete/ false information/incorrect information/violation of
regulatory provisions while applying for Extension of Approval shall invite appropriate penal action
against the Institution / University. The Institution /University shall be liable to any one or more of the
following punitive actions by the Council.

a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution/University

NOTE: University / Institution shall be liable to withdrawal of Approval in case of running Programme(s)/
Course(s) with partial approval of AICTE. University shall be liable to withdrawal of approval in case
of violation of regulatory provisions (e.g. Running Integrated/Dual programme/course which requires
approval from different regulatory bodies.)

8.3 Non-Fulfilment of Requirement of Qualified Principal/ Director

An Institution, not having qualified Principal/ Director for a period more than 12 months shall be liable
to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council till the regular Principal/ Director is
appointed. For the non-Fulfilment of requirement of qualified Principal/ Director, the actions initiated
by the Trust/ Society/ Company/ affiliating Body/ State Government/ UT, process of recruitment not
followed, temporary arrangements made and satisfactory reasons for non-appointment, if any, have
to be ascertained.

Accordingly, the Institution shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the
Council:

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 118 ---
a. Reduction in “Approved Intake”
b. No admission for one Academic Year
c Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE

8.4 Non-Fulfilment of Faculty: Student ratio, not adhering to the Pay Scales and/or qualifications
prescribed for Faculty

8.4.1 As per All India Council for Technical Education notification (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/
Staff Member) Regulations, 2021 vide FNo. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated
25.03.2021, all Pay Scales related Issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the
concerned State / Central Government. Based on the recommendation of State Government /
Central Government, AICTE shall initiate punitive action.

8.4.2 In case of standalone PGDM /PGCM Institutions, AICTE shall Initiate Action through Committee
constituted by AICTE.

8.4.3. State Fee Regulatory Authorities should decide the Fee commensurate with the State
Government Employees and other Institutes under the purview of the concerned State and
the States should follow the same.

8.4.4 Institutions/Universities/Deemed-to-be-Universities if recommended under Clauses above
found not adhering to Pay scales or qualifications prescribed for Faculty members for more
than 12 months and not maintaining prescribed Faculty: Student ratio shall be liable to any
one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:

a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c. No admission in respective Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE

e. Withdrawal of approval in the respective Course(s)

f. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

NOTE: Undertaking should be from Chairman/Secretary of Trust / Society /Company in all
Faculty Related Grievances.

8.5 Non-Fulfilment of Computer, Software, Internet, Printers, Laboratory Equipment, Books,
Journals, Library facilities requirements, etc.

Institutions not maintaining prescribed requirements of Computer, Software, Internet, Printers,
Laboratory Equipment, Books, Journals, Library facilities, etc. shall be liable to any one or more of the
following punitive actions by the Council.

a Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

8.6 Non-Fulfilment of Essential Requirements

Institutions not maintaining essential requirements as per Appendix 6 of the Approval Process
Handbook shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council.

a Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE

8.7. Non-Fulfilment of Location/ Built-up Area/ Land as specified in the Approval Process Handbook
at the time of year of establishment or the current Academic Year

Institutions working in a temporary location or at location not approved by the Council and Institutions
not fulfilling prescribed Built-up area requirements shall be liable to any one or more of the following
punitive actions by the Council.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 119 ---
8.8

8.9

a. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

Excess Admission

Excess admission over the “Approved Intake” shall not be allowed under any circumstances. In case any
excess admission is reported to/ noted by the Council, appropriate penal action shall be initiated against
the Institution. The Institution shall be liable to any one or more of the following punitive actions by the
Council.

a. Five times the total Fee collected per student shall be levied against each excess admission as
fine.
b. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year

Reduction in “Approved Intake”
No admission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year
Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

e-em an

Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
Charging Excess Fee than the Fee Prescribed by the Concerned State/ Fee Regulatory Committee

The Institutions shall have to announce all Fees such as Tuition Fee, Examination Fee, etc. on their
Web Site transparently and adhere to the same strictly. No Technical Institution shall collect any other
Fee (Payment/ Amount) from the students, in addition to the Fee fixed by the State/ Fee Regulatory
Committee. If any Institution does not follow the said guidelines, the Institution shall be liable to
punitive actions from any one or more of the following by the Council:

Twice the total Fee collected per student and the excess Fee collected shall be refunded to the student.

a Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
b. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

c No admission status in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

d. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

e. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

f. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE

Institutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical/online verification of Infrastructural
facilities/ Institutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building
License/ Form D/ Barrier free environment/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities not having
NAD/ Institutions demanding for the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at
the time of joining the Institution.

In the event, a Faculty member intends to leave the Institution in the middle of the Semester without
sufficient notice to the Institution to make a suitable alternate arrangement, he/ she may complete
the syllabus of the Course(s) allotted to him/ her keeping in view of the academic interests of students.
In any case, the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members shall not be retained by the
Institution.

Institutions not allowing Expert Visit Committee for physical verification of Infrastructural facilities/
Institutions not having Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D/ Barrier
free environment/ Institutions Deemed to be Universities not having NAD/ Institutions demanding for
the Original Degree Certificates from the Faculty members at the time of joining the Institution shall be
liable for any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:

a. Not eligible to receive any grant from AICTE
b. No admission for one Academic Year
c Withdrawal of approval of the Institution

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 120 ---
8.11

Violation of norms of admission by the Institutions/ Universities conducting PGDM/ PGCM
Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having NAD or Institutions offering PGDM Course(s) in Regular
or ODL mode not uploading student enrollment data and list of students completed the Course(s)
successfully along with their CGPA/ Percentage of marks in the AICTE Web-Portal.

Norms for conducting PGDM/ PGCM Courses shall be as per Appendix 9 of the Approval Process
Handbook. If any Institution/ Institution Deemed to be University fails to comply with any of the
conditions specified therein/any violation in the admission procedure specified in the Approval Process
Handbook for the PGDM/ PGCM Courses/ PGDM Institutions not having NAD or Institutions offering
PGDM Course(s) not uploading student enrollment data in the AICTE Web-Portal, the Council after
giving reasonable opportunity of being heard through Standing Appellate Committee shall be liable
for any one or more of the following punitive actions by the Council:

a. No admission for Academic Year
b. Withdrawal of approval of the Institution.
c. Withdrawal of graded autonomy granted by the Council.

Violation of Norms in Case of Collaboration and Twinning Programme

a. Ifa University/ Institution fails to comply with any of the conditions as contained in the Approval
Process Handbook, even after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard through Standing
Appellate Committee, the Council shall withdraw the approval of the Twinning Programme
granted to such University/ Institution to offer their Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/
Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree in India and forbid
such Foreign University/ Institution to either open Centers or enter into any Collaborative
arrangement with any University/ Institution in India.

b. The Council shall also inform the concerned agencies including Ministry of External Affairs,
Ministry of Home Affairs, RBI of such decisions and advise these agencies to take any or all of
the following measures

Refusal/ withdrawal for grant of visa to employees/ teachers of the said Foreign University/
Institution.

Stop transfer of funds from India to parent Country.

Informing the Public about the withdrawal of approval of the Twinning Programme with
Foreign University/ Institution and the consequence there of.

c In case, it comes to the notice of the Council, that a Foreign University is offering Diploma/
Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate
Degree Level Programme in Technical Education in India directly or in Collaboration with an
Indian Partner without obtaining approval, the Council shall initiate immediate action under
the Indian Penal Code for Criminal breach of Trust, misconduct, fraud, cheating, etc.

d. Once the approval of the Twinning Programme is withdrawn, the Council shall make an attempt
in co-ordination with concerned State Government/ UT to re-allocate the students enrolled in
such Programme to other approved Institutions of the Council. The Institution shall have to
return the entire Fee collected from such students to the Institutions in which the students are
accommodated.

e. Such Foreign University/ Institution shall not be allowed to collaborate with any other Centre/
nstitution or enter into a Collaborative arrangement in India for at least next 3 years.

f. UGC amendments from time to time on the subject shall be applicable.
Fee Refund Cases

8.13.1 In the event of a student withdrawing before the start of the Course, the entire Fee collected
from the student, after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only) shall be refunded by the Institution. It would not be permissible for Institutions
to retain the School/ Institution Leaving Certificates in original.

8.13.2 Incase, if a student leaves after joining the Course and if the vacated seat is consequently filled
by another student by the last date of admission, the Institution must refund the Fee collected
after a deduction of the processing Fee of not more than =1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only)
and proportionate deductions of monthly Fee and hostel rent, where applicable.

8.13.3. The last date for withdrawal of PGDM admission for the purpose of refund of Fee shall be
30 June of every year. However, due to pandemic Supreme Court has permitted up to
July 30", 2022.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 121 ---
8.14

8.15

8.16
8.17

8.13.4 In case the vacated seat is not filled, the Institution should refund the Security Deposit and
return the original documents.

8.13.5 The Institution should not demand Fee for the subsequent years from the students cancelling
their admission at any point of time. Fee refund along with the return of Certificates should be
completed within 7 days.

8.13.6 Institutions not following guidelines issued by the Council regarding refund of Fee for
cancellation of admission or delaying refunds shall be liable to any one or more of the following
punitive actions by the Council.

a. Fine for Non-Compliance of refund rules of the Fee levied against each case shall be five
times the total Fee collected per student

b. Suspension of approval for NRI and supernumerary seats, if any, for one Academic Year
c. Reduction in “Approved Intake”

d. Noadmission in one/ more Course(s) for one Academic Year

e. Withdrawal of approval for Programme(s)/ Course(s)

NOTE: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the academic related activities as notified by the
Council from time to time are binding on all the AICTE Approved Universities/Institutions.

Security Deposit

In case of Institutions where FDRs are encashed before the date of maturity or not depositing the
required Security Deposit at the time of LoA, a penalty of 10% of the value of the FDR shall be imposed.
However, Institutions that had not created FDR/created FDR for lesser duration/ lesser amount than
prescribed at the time of LoA have to create the same accordingly as specified in the Approval Process
Handbook.

Complaints regarding the use of fake certificates of SC/ST/OBC to be investigated in time bound
manner and if found guilty, such admission should be cancelled. Further, appropriate action shall
be initiated accordingly with due intimation to AICTE.

Penalty amount shall be paid online to the Council as per the instructions.

Complaint Cases

a. All Institutions shall have Grievance Redressal mechanism as notified by the Council.

b. In case of receipt of any Complaint(s) about an Institution, the same shall be processed by
Public Grievance Redressal Cell (PGRC) of AICTE.

c The Complaint shall be placed before a Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC) for

further necessary action. If necessary, the complainant may be called to appear before SCSC
at his/ her own cost. Based on the recommendation of SCSC, a Warning or Show Cause Notice
may be issued to the Institution or Expert Visit Committee may be conducted through Approval
Bureau.

d. The report of the Expert Visit Committee/ Show Cause notice, if issued shall be placed before
the Standing Hearing Committee.

e. Two representatives of the Institution (Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company
or Principal/ Director/ Faculty of the Institution/ Trustee duly authorized by them) along with
Photo ID proof shall present their case along with the compliance and supporting documents
before the Standing Hearing Committee. If necessary, the complainant may be called to appear
before Standing Hearing Committee at his/ her own cost.

f. The recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive
Committee for approval.

g. The decision of the Executive Committee shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal by a detailed
Speaking Order. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the
Institution shall have the right to appeal as per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 122 ---
h. As per CVC guidelines, Anonymous/ Pseudonymous Complaints shall not be processed.

i. Each Institution shall upload the number of Complaints and Grievances received and action
taken in their Web site and update AICTE through the monthly online status report.

8.18 Procedure for Restoration against Punitive Action

a. The Applicant shall make an application for restoration on AICTE Web-Portal along with the
application for Extension of Approval of the next Academic Year.

b. The restoration is subject to Expert Visit Committee verifying all the requirements as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.

c The Expert Visit Committee Report shall be placed before the Standing Hearing Committee.

d. Recommendations of the Standing Hearing Committee shall be placed before the Executive

Committee for necessary Approval.

e. If the Institution is aggrieved by the decision of the Executive Committee, the Institution shall
have the right to appeal as per Clause 1.10 of the Approval Process Handbook. The Council
shall give an opportunity for presenting its case before Standing Appellate Committee. The
recommendations of the Standing Appellate Committee shall be considered by the Council.

f. In case of restoration, Extension of Approval with restored Intake shall be uploaded in AICTE
Web-Portal, or otherwise Speaking Order shall be also be uploaded in the Web-Portal.

8.19 Under extraordinary circumstances, if restoration/ Punitive action (except fine) is approved by
the Council beyond 30" April of the Calendar Year in compliance to the order dated 13.12.2012
passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in CA No.9048/ 2012 and the same shall be
implemented for the next Academic Year only.

In an extraordinary circumstance, to implement the withdrawal of approval in the current Academic
Year, students admitted shall be shifted to the nearby AICTE approved Institutions in consultation with
the concerned University/ Board/ State Government/ UT.

NOTE: Any changes in the Schedule for any of the approval (including academic) related activities as
notified by the Council from time to time is binding on all the AICTE Approved Institutions / Universities.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 123 ---
APPENDIX-1

Norms for Duration, Entry Level Qualifications and
Statutory Reservations of the Technical Programmes

1.1 Diploma

SI. No. Programme Duration Eligibility

i Engineering and 3 or4 years |Passed 10 Std./ SSC examination
Technology
ii Applied Arts and 3 or4 years |Passed 10 Std./ SSC examination
Crafts
iii |Design 3 0r4years | Passed 10" Std./ SSC examination
iv | Hotel Management 3 years Passed 10+2 examination
and Catering _
Technology 4 years Passed 10" Std./ SSC examination
v__ |All Programmes 2 years Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics /
(Lateral Entry Chemistry/ Computer Science/Electronics/Information
to Second Year Technology/ Biology/Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/
Diploma) Technical Vocational subject/ Agriculture/ Engineering
Graphics/ Business Studies/Entrepreneurship as per table
1.3(a).
OR

10" + (2 years ITI) shall be eligible for admission to Second
Year Diploma Course(s) in ANY branch of Engineering and
Technology.

(The Affiliating Body will offer suitable bridge courses such

as Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the
students coming from diverse backgrounds to achieve desired
learning outcomes of the programme)

vi Vocational** (NSQF 3 years Passed 10* Std. / SSC examination.
Level 5)

**In case a student exits after successfully completing the First/ Second year, He/ She shall be provided with
Skill Certificate (as per the levels) by the State Technical Board. Skill certificate is purely to provide skills (and
not formal education), hence there shall be no equivalence for the same and there shall be no vertical mobility
with Skill certificates.

1.2 Post Diploma

SI. No. Programme Duration Eligibility
i Engineering and 18 Months or | Passed Diploma examination with at least 50% marks (45%
Technology, Applied 2 years marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved category)
Arts and Crafts, in the qualifying examination.

Hotel Management
and Catering
Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 124 ---
1.3 Under Graduate Degree

i Engineering and Ayears | Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/
Technology# Computer Science/ Electronics/ Information Technology/ Biology/

Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational
subject/ Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/
Entrepreneurship as per ta ie1.3(a)
Agriculture stream (for Agriculture Engineering)
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) inthe above subjects taken together.
Passed min. 3 years Diploma examination with at least 45% marks
(40% marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved category)
subject to vacancies in the First Year, in case the vacancies at lateral
entry are exhausted.
(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such as
Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the students
coming from diverse backgrounds to prepare Level playing field
and desired learning outcomes of the programme)

ii Planning Ayears | Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per table1.3(a)
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging
to reserved category) in the qualifying Examination.

iii Applied Arts and Ayears | Passed 10+2 examination

Crafts Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging
to reserved category) in the qualifying Examination.

iv Design Ayears | Passed 10+2 examination
Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging
to reserved category) in the qualifying Examination.

Vv Hotel Management |4 years | Passed 10+2 examination

and Catering Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging
Technology to reserved category) in the qualifying Examination.

vi Engineering and 3 years | Passed Minimum THREE years / TWO years (Lateral Entry) Diploma
Technology (Lateral examination with at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of
Entry to Second candidates belonging to reserved category) in ANY branch of
year)# Engineering and Technology.

Passed B.Sc. Degree from a recognized University as defined by
UGC, with at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) and passed 10+2 examination
with Mathematics as a subject.

Passed D.Voc. Stream in the same or allied sector.

(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such as
Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the students
coming from diverse backgrounds to achieve desired learning
outcomes of the programme)

Refer table 1.10 of Appendix-1

vii Engineering and 2years | Refer table 1.10 of Appendix-1
Technology (Lateral
Entry to Third year)#

viii Engineering and 1 year Refer table 1.10 of Appendix-1
Technology (Lateral
Entry to Final year)#

ix All Programmes Lateral | Passed Minimum THREE years / TWO years (Lateral Entry) Diploma
Other than Entry to | examination in a Programme with at least 45% marks (40%marks in
Engineering and Second | case of candidates belonging to reserved category) in appropriate
Technology/ year Programme.

Planning! esign

x Vocational 3 years | Passed 10+2 examination.

(NSQFLevel 7)

#Respective State Government/ Affiliating University/Board may decide the eligibility criteria for entry level
Qualification for different Programmes/ Courses.

NOTE: Admission of B.Tech/B.E. graduates, in other branches of Engineering as an additional degree through
Lateral Entry will be facilitated by the respective Technical Universities by allowing them to take admission at
appropriate level of B.Tech/B.E. discipline/branch of Engineering. [Refer AICTE circular No. F.No. AICTE/P&AP/
Misc/2020 dated 09.08.2021]

| 89 |

AICTE

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 125 ---
1.3 (a) Diploma/Under Graduate Engineering Entry level qualification 10+2 level

Major Disciplines

Mandatory courses

at 10+2 Level

Other relevant course(s) for this discipline

1 Aeronautical Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
2 |Agriculture Engineering** Phy, Chem Maths/Biology/Biotechnology/Agriculture/
OR Agriculture stream
Agriculture stream
3 | Architecture Nil Select any courses out of 14*
4 {Planning Maths For remaining two courses select any courses
out of 14°
5 |Biotechnology** Phy, Chem Select any one from Bio/Biotechnology/Maths
6 Ceramic Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
7 Civil Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
8 |Computer Science and Phy, Maths For remaining single course select any courses
Engineering out of 14*
9 Chemical Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
10 |Dairy Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
11. | Electrical Engineering Phy, Maths For remaining single course select any courses
out of 14°
12 |Energy Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
13 |Electronics Engineering Phy, Maths For remaining single course select any courses
out of 14°
14 |Mechanical Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
15 |Fire and Safety Engineering _| Phy, Chem, Maths NA
16 |Food Engineering Chem For remaining two courses select any courses
out of 14°
17 |Leather Technology Chem For remaining two courses select any courses
out of 14°
18 |Marine Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
19 |Metallurgy Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
20 | Military Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
21 |Mining Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
22 |Nano Technology Phy, Chem, Maths NA
23 |Nuclear Science and Phy, Chem, Maths NA
Technology
24 |Packaging Technology Nil Select any courses out of 14*
25 |Pharmaceutical Phy, Chem Select any one from Bio/Biotechnology/Maths
Engineering**
26 |Printing Engineering** Phy, Chem For remaining single course select any courses
out of 14°
27 |Textile Engineering Phy, Chem, Maths NA
28 | Fashion Technology Nil Select any courses out of 14*
29 |Textile Chemistry Chem For remaining two courses select any courses
out of 14°

** First one or two Semesters may be so designed that students with Biology/Biotechnology background
have adequate courses on Maths and Vice Versa and then the class is at level studying field for the rest of the
semesters.

#Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/ Computer Science/Electronics/Information Technology/ Biology/
Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject/ Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/

Business Studies/Entrepreneurship

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 126 ---
1.5 Integrated / Dual Degree Courses

SI.No. Programme Duration Eligibility

i Engineering S years |Passed 10+2 examination with Physics/ Mathematics / Chemistry/

and Technology Computer Science/Electronics/Information Technology/ Biology/
Informatics Practices/ Biotechnology/ Technical Vocational subject/
Agriculture/ Engineering Graphics/ Business Studies/Entrepreneurship
as per table1.3(a)

Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the above subjects taken together.

OR

Passed min. 3 years Diploma examination with at least 45% marks
(40% marks in case of candidates belonging to reserved category)
subject to vacancies in the First Year, in case the vacancies at lateral
entry are exhausted.

(The Universities will offer suitable bridge courses such as
Mathematics, Physics, Engineering drawing, etc., for the students
coming from diverse backgrounds to achieve desired learning
outcomes of the programme).

ii Planning 5years |Passed 10+2 examination with eligibility as per table1.3(a)

Obtained at least 45% marks (40% in case of candidates belonging to
reserved category) in the qualifying examination.

iii | Hotel 5years |Passed 10+2 examination.
Management ; ; .
and Catering Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
Technology belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying examination.

iv |MCA S years |Passed 10+2 examination with Mathematics/ Statistics/ Accountancy

as compulsory subjects.

Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the above subjects taken together.

v MBA 5years |Passed 10+2 examination.

Obtained at least 45% marks (40% marks in case of candidates
belonging to reserved category) in the qualifying examination.

1.6 Fellow Programme

SI. No. Programme Duration Eligibility
i Fellow Programme in | Minimum 3 years Master's Degree or equivalent in Engineering
Management but shall not exceed | and Technology/ Management/ Economics/
5 years Social Science/Biological Science/ Pure Science/

Commerce/ Humanities with FIRST CLASS

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 127 ---
1.7. Certification Levels of Skill Courses

Certification Normal Qualification Case l Case Il
Level
Vocational Certifying Vocational Certifying
Qualification Body Qualification Body
1 Secondary Grade IX Grade School Grade (Vocational) IX School
School (Vocational) IX
2 Secondary Grade X Grade School Grade (Vocational) X School
School (Vocational) X
3 Higher Secondary Diploma Board of Grade(Vocational) XI School
School Grade XI (Vocational) Technical
Educati
4 Higher Secondary _| -------------------- ucation Grade (Vocational) School
School Grade XII XIl
5 1St Year Bachelor's Degree (Vocational) University
6 Second Bachelor's Year | Advanced
Diploma
7 Third Year Bachelor's _| (Vocational)

1.8 Reservation Policy of the Central Government (Including EWS) / Respective State Government/
UT as the case shall be applicable to all the above Programmes (1.1 to 1.7)

1.9 The concerned State Government/ UT Admission authority shall decide Modalities of Admission

a) The admission for Integrated/Dual Degree Course in Management shall be effected on the
basis of separate merit lists of students passed in various streams at 12" Std.as,

. Science stream: 20 seats
. Commerce stream: 20 seats

. Arts Stream: 20 seats

In case of non - availability of students from one stream, remaining seats in that stream shall
be allotted to students from other two streams on an equal basis. In case of non-availability of
students from two streams, remaining seats in those streams shall be allotted to students from
third-stream.

b) In case of Integrated Hotel Management and Catering Technology, selection of the students for
this Course shall be done at the start of the Second year of Bachelor’s Degree. Students selected
for this Course shall take additional Course in Management along with the Third Semester of
the Regular Course.

©) For integrating vocational and conventional education, the Skill Assessment Matrix for
Vocational Advancement of Youth (SAMVAY) had been launched by MoE) in November, 2014.
The credit framework (as per the following) is now in operation which allows lateral and vertical
mobility within the vocational educational system and between current education systems. It
defines the rules for credit allotment and follows the National Skills Qualification Framework.

The detailed SAMVAY document is available at: https://www.aicte-india.org/sites/default/
files/SAMVAY_1_.pdf

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 128 ---
1.10 Credit Framework for the movement from Professional/Vocational Education to Engineering &

Technology
Academic _ Entry Qualifications at different Exiting Qualifications at NHEQF/NSQF Unified Credit
. Level levels. different levels level Level (UCF)
1 | 10" Std. 10" Standard Level 2 3.0
2 |11%Std./ | 10 Completed A candidate exits with Level 3 3.5
1% year 10+1 year of Diploma or
Diploma equivalent with NHEQF/
NSOF level 3/ UCF level 3.5
3 |12%Std./ | Acandidate completing 10+1 year}A candidate exits with Level 4 4.0
2" year of Diploma or 11"std or equivalent | 10+2 year of Diploma or
Diploma vocational with NHEQF / NSQF|equivalent with NHEQF/
level 3/ UCF level 3.5 NSOF level 4/ UCF level 4
4 |Finalyear |A candidate completing 10+2 year | Diploma Level 5 45
Diploma of Diploma or 12" std or equivalent

vocational with NHEQF / NSQF
level 4/ UCF level 4

5 |1%*yearUG | 12" Completed Undergraduate Certificate Level 5 45
Degree

6 |2™yearUG |A candidate with Diploma in|Undergraduate Diploma Level 6 5.0
Degree appropriate branch of Engineering

/Equivalent Vocational or Technical
Program with NHEOQF level 5/UCF
level 4.5 completed

7 |3"yearUG |A candidate with 10+4/ 12+2 in| Bachelor of Vocational Level 7 5.5
Degree appropriate domain with NSQF | Education
level 6/UCF level 5 completed
8 |Finalyear | A candidate with 3 years Bachelor | B.E./B.Tech. UG Engineering 6.0
UG Degree |degree in Vocational/B.Sc._ in Degree

appropriate domain with NHEQF
level 7/ UCF level 5.5 completed

+ At each entry, Institution/ University has to identify the educational gaps/ skill gaps and suitable
bridge courses may be offered.

+ To make the students employable after every exit, the skill component with progressive
enhancement in skills in respective disciplines may be introduced in the curriculum right from the
1 year of the program by the concerned regulatory body/ University/ Technical Board, as the case
may be.

1.11 Open Distance Learning / Online Learning Courses

The Duration and Entry Level Qualifications for the ODL/OL Courses shall be the same as specified by
UGC on the subject from time-to-time.

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 129 ---
APPENDIX-2

Approved Nomenclature of Courses

2.1 Diploma in Engineering and Technology

Course Name SI.No Course Name
*Emerging/Multidisciplinary Area Nomenclatures
1 3-D Animation and Graphics 37__| Ceramic Engineering and Technology
2 Administration Services 38 | Ceramic Technology
Advanced Electronics and .

3 Communication Engineering 39 | Ceramics

4 _| Aeronautical Engineering 40 | Ceramics Engineering

5 | Agricultural Engineering * 41__| Chemical Engineering

6 _| Agricultural Technology 42 | Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer)

7 _ | Agriculture Engineering 43 _| Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)

8 | Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 44 | Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)

9 | Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Avionics) 45 | Chemical Engineering (Petrochemical)

10 aS ower Plu): Engineering (Helicopter 46 | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

11 | Alternate Energy Technologies * 47 | Chemical Engineering (Sugar Technology)

12 | Animation and Multimedia Technology 48 Chemical Engineering Specialization in
Petrochemicals

13__| Apparel Design and Fabric 49 | Chemical Technology

14__| Apparel Design and Fabrication Technology 50 | Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)

. . Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic

15 | Apparel Design and Fashion Technology 51 Technology)

16 | Apparel Manufacture and Design 52 _| Chemical Technology (Rubber/Plastic)

17_| Apparel Technology 53 _| Chemical Technology Fertilizer

Applied Electronics and instrumentation .

18 Engineering 54 | Cinematography*

19 | Applied Videography 55 _| Civil (Construction)

20 | Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter) 56 _| Civil (Public Health and Environment) Engineering

21__| Artificer Training (Electrical) 57 __| Civil and Environmental Engineering*

22_| Artificer Training (Electronics) 58 _| Civil and Rural Engineering*

23 _| Artificer Training (Mechanical) 59 | Civil Engineering

24 Aer ege gence (Al) and Machine 60 | Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)

25__| Audiography and Sound Engineering 61 _| Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution Control)

26 | Automation and Robotics* 62 Civil Engineering (Environmental and Pollution
Control)

. . . Civil Engineering (Environmental

27 | Automobile Engineering 63 Engineering)

28 | Automobile Engineering (Automobile Fitter) 64 _| Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)

29 | Beauty Culture and Cosmetology 65__| Civil Engineering (Rural Engineering)

30 | Biomedical Electronics 66 | Civil Engineering Environment and Pollution Control

31__| Biomedical Engineering 67 _| Civil Environmental Engineering

32 | Biotechnology 68 _| Civil Technology

33 | CADCAM 69 | Combat Armament and Weapon Technology

34 _ | Carpet Technology 70 Combat Driving and Maintenance
Technology

35 | CDDM 71 | Cloud Computing and Big Data*

36 | Cement Technology 72 | Combat Radio and Communication Technology

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 94 |
--- Page 130 ---
73 Commercial and Computer Practice 108 Direction Screen Play Writing and TV Production

74 Commercial Practice 109 Dress Designing and Garment Manufacturing

75 Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG) 110 Drilling Engineering

76 Networking! and Computer 111 Electrical and Electronics (Power System)

77 Drone Making Costume Design and 112 Electrical and Electronics Engineering

78 Nunecement and Business 113 Electrical and instrumentation Engineering

79 Computer Applications 114 Electrical and Mechanical Engineering

80 Computer Engineering 115 Electrical Engineering

81 Computer Engineering and Application 116 Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

82 Computer Engineering and loT 117 Electrical Engineering (Industrial Control)

83 Computer Hardware and Maintenance 118 Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)

84 Computer Hardware and Networking 119 Electrical Engineering and Electric Vehicle Technology

85 Computer Hardware Engineering 120 Electrical Engineering industrial Control

86 Computer Networking 121 Electrical Power System

87 Computer Science 122 Electrical Power Systems

88 Computer Science and 123 Electronic instrumentation and Control

Engineering Engineering

89 Computer Science and information Technology | 124 Electronic Science and Engineering

90 Computer Science and Technology 125 Electronics Engineering

91 Computer Software Technology 126 Electronics (Fiber Optics)

92 Computer Technology 127 Electronics (Robotics)

93 Construction Automation* 128 Electronics and Communication Engineering

94 Construction Engineering 129 (industry integrated Engineering

95 Construction Technology 130 Enoincering Wien waves unieaton

96 Construction Technology and Management| 131 Electronics and Communication Technology

97 Control and instrumentation 132 Electronics and Communications Engineering

98 Cosmetology and Health 133 Electronics and Computer Engineering

99 Costumer Design and Dress Making 134 Electronics and Electrical Engineering

100 Cyber Forensics and information Security* | 135 Electronics and instrumentation Engineering

101 Cyber Physical Systems and Security* 136 Electronics and Telecommunication

102 Cyber System and Information Security 137 Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering

103 Dairy Engineering 138 Enoineering. Tele-Communication

104 Design and Drafting Technology 139 E ectronics and Te ecommunication
Engineering (Radio and System)
Electronics and Telecommunication

105 Digital Electronics 140 Engineering (Technologynician Electronic
Radio)

106 Digital Electronics and Microprocessor 141 E ectronics and Telecommunications
Engineering

107 Digital Manufacturing Technologies* 142 Electronics and Video Engineering

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 131 ---
Electronics Communication and

143 instrumentation Engineering 182 | Garment Technology
. . . Geographic information System (G.I.S.) and
144 | Electronics Engineering 183 Global Positioning System
145 | Electronics Engineering (Digital Electronics) 184 | Geoinformatics
146 | Electronics Engineering (Industry integrated) 185 | Glass and Ceramics Engineering
147 | Electronics Engineering (Micro Electronics) 186 | Handloom and Textile Technology
148 Electronics Engineering (Specialization in 187 | Heat Power Engineering
Consumer Electronics)
149 Electronics Engineering Modern Consumer 188. | Home Science
Electronics
150 | Electronics Engineering with Microprocessor 189 Hotel Management and Catering
Technology
151 | Electronics instrument and Control 190 | Industrial and Production Engineering
152 Electronics instrumentation and Control 191 | Industrial Electronics
Engineering
153 | Electronics Production and Maintenance 192 | Industrial Production Engineering
154 | Electronics Robotics 193 _| Information and Communication Technology
155 | Electronics Technology 194 | Information Engineering
156 | Electronics Tele Communication 195 | Information Science
157 | Embedded Systems 196 | Information Science and Engineering
158 | Environmental Engineering 197 _| Information Science and Technology
159 | Fabrication Technology 198 | Information Technology
160 | Fabrication Technology and Erection Engineering | 199 | Information Technology and Engineering
161 | Fashion and Apparel Design 200 nformation Technology Enabled Services
and Management
162 | Fashion and Clothing Technology 201 | Instrument Technology
163 | Fashion and Design 202 | Instrumentation and Control Engineering
164 | Fashion Designing 203 | Instrumentation and Process Control
165 | Fashion Designing and Garment Technology 204 | Instrumentation Engineering
166 | Fashion Technology 205 | Instrumentation Technology
167 | Film and Video Editing 206 | Instruments and Medical Equipment
1 Film Technology and TV Production Integrated Circuit (IC) Design and
68 . 207 Sg
(Cinematography) Fabrication*
169 Film Technology and TV Production (Digital 208 | Interior Decoration
Intermediate) *
170 | Finance Account and Auditing 209 | Interior Design
171 | Fire Technology and Safety 10 Jewellery Design and Manufacture
Technology
172 | Fisheries Technology 211 | Knitting and Garment Technology
173 | Food Processing and Preservation 212 | Knitting Technology
174 | Food Processing Technology 213 | Leather and Fashion Technology
175 | Food Technology 214 | Leather Goods and Footwear Tech
176 | Footwear Technology 215 | Leather Technology
1 Leather Technology Footwear Computer
77 | Foundry Technology 216 Aided Shoe Design
178 | Gaming and Animation* 217 | Leather Technology Tanning
179 | Garment and Fashion Technology 218 | Library and information Science
180 | Garment Fabrication 219 | Logistics Technology
181 | Garment Manufacturing Technology 220 | Machine Engineering

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 132 ---
21 Machine Tools and Maintenance 257 Metallurgy
Engineering

222 | Machine Tools Technology 258 | Micro Electronics*

223 | Maintenance Engineering 259 Mine Engineering

224 | Manufacturing Engineering 260 Mine Surveying

225 | Manufacturing Technology 261 Mining and Mine Surveying

226 | Marine Engineering 262 Mining Engineering

227 | Marine Engineering and Systems 263 Multimedia Technology
Marine Engineering and Systems (Artificer Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in

228 Training) 264 Mechanical and Electrical

229 | Mass Communication 265 Network Engineering

230 | Material Management 266 Office Management and Computer

Application

231 | Mechanical CAD/CAM 267 | Ophthalmic Technology

232 | Mechanical Engineering 268 Opto-Electronics Engineering

233 | Mechanical Engineering (Production) 269 Packaging Technology

234 | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile) 270 Paint Technology

235 | Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM) 271 Paper Technology

236 | Mechanical Engineering (Foundry) 272 Paper and Pulp Technology

237 Mechanical Engineering (Industry 273 Petrochemical Engineering
Integrated)

238 Mechanica Engineering (Machine Tool 274 Petrochemical Refinery
Maintenance and Repairs)

239 | Mechanical Engineering (Maintenance) 275 Petrochemical Technology

240 Mechanica Engineering (Refrigeration and 276 Petroleum Engineering
Air Conditioning)

241 Mechanica Engineering (Repair and 77 Petroleum Technology
Maintenance)

242 | Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die) 278 Photography

243 | Mechanical Engineering Automobile 279 Plastic and Mould Technology

244 Mechanica Engineering Power Plant 280 Plastic and Polymer Engineering
Engineering

245 | Mechanical Engineering Production 281 Plastic Engineering

246 Mechanica Engineering, Refrigeration and 282 Plastic Mould Technology
Air Conditioning

247 | Mechanical Engineering (CAD) 283 Plastic Technology

248 | Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering 284 | Plastics Engineering

249 Mechanica Engineering Tube Well 285 Plastics Mould Technology
Engineering

250 | Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal 286 Plastics Processing and Testing

251 Mechanica Welding and Sheet Metal 287 Plastics Technology
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering Computer Aided

252 Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing 288 Polymer Technology

253 | Mechatronics* 289 Post Plastic Process and Testing

254 | Medical Electronics Engineering 290 Power Electronics

255 | Medical Laboratory Technology 291 Precision Manufacturing*

256 | Metallurgical Engineering 292 Printing and Packing Technology

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 133 ---
293 Printing Technology 317 | Textile Designing Printing

294 | Production and Industrial Engineering 318 | Textile Engineering

295 Production Engineering 319 | Textile Manufactures

296 Management. and Construction 320 | Textile Manufacturing and Technology
297 | Robotics and Mechatronics 321 Textile Manufacturing Technology

298 | Robotic Process Automation* 322 | Textile Marketing and Management
299 | Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 323 | Textile Processing

300 | Renewable Energy* 324 | Textile Processing Technology

301 Rubber Technology 325 | Textile Technology

302 Monagement and Export 326 | Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre)
303 Shipbuilding Engineering 327 | Textile Technology (Textile Design and Weaving)
304 | Small Arms Engineering 328 | Tool and Die Engineering

305 Smart Agritech* 329 | Tool and Die Making

306 | Smart and Sustainable Transportation* 330 | Tool Die and Mould Making

307. | Sound Recording and Engineering 331 Transportation Engineering

308 Sugar Technology 332 Transportation Engineering and Management
309 | Surface Coating Technology 333 | Travel and Tourism

310 Survey Engineering 334 | TVand Sound Engineering

311 Technician X-Ray Technology 335 | Virtual and Augmented Reality*

312 | Telecommunication Engineering 336 | Water Technology and Health Science
313 | Telecommunication Technology 337 | Weapons Engineering

314 | Textile Chemistry 338 | Web Designing

315 | Textile Design 339 | Wood and Paper Technology

316 | Textile Designing 340 | Wood Technology

* Emerging / Multidisciplinary Area Nomenclatures

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 134 ---
2.2 Post Diploma in Engineering and Technology

SI. No Course Name SI. No Course Name
1 | Acoustic Survey 26 Knitting and Garment Technology
2 __|Advanced Die and Mould Making 27 Mechanical Engineering
3 | Advanced Electrical Power System 28 Medical Electronics
4  |Advanced Electronics and Communication 29 Petrochemical Engineering
Engineering
5 |Advanced Mechatronics and Industrial Automation 30 Plant Engineering
6 _|Advanced Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 31 Plastic Mould Design
7 | Automobile Engineering 32 Plastic Mould Design (CAD/CAM)
8 | Biotechnology Tissue Culture 33 Plastic Mould Technology
9 |CAD/CAM 34 Plastic Technology
10 |Computer Aided Design and Manufacture 35 Plastics Processing and Testing
11. |Computer Aided Design Manufacture and 36 Polymer Science and Rubber
Engineering Technology
12  |Computer Applications 37 Post Plastic Mould Design
13. | Computer Hardware and Networking 38 Post Plastic Process and Testing
14 | Computer Hardware Maintenance and Networking 39 Power Plant Engineering and Energy
Management
15 | Electrical Engineering 40 Production Engineering
SystemTechnology
16 | Electronics Communication and Instrumentation 41 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
Engineering
17 | Environmental Engineering 42 Rubber Technology
18 | Fire Technology and Safety 43 Software Testing
19 | Food Technology 44 Textile Processing
20 | Forge Technology 45 Thermal Power Engineering
21 _| Foundry Technology 46 Tool and Die Engineering
22. | Geographic information System (G.I.S.) and Global 47 Tool Design
Positioning System
23 | Industrial Safety 48 Town Planning and Architecture
24 |Industrial Safety and Engineering 49 Web Designing
25 | Information Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 135 ---
2.3 Under Graduate Courses in Engineering and Technology

Course Name

Course Name

* Emerging / Multidisciplinary Area Nomenclatures

1 3-D Animation and Graphics 41 | Chemical Engineering

2 Additive Manufacturing * 42 | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

3 Advanced Mechatronics and industrial | 43 |Chemical Technology
Automation

4 Aero Space Engineering 44 | Civil and Environmental Engineering *

5 Aeronautical Engineering 45 | Civil and infrastructure Engineering

6 Aerospace Engineering 46 | Civil and Rural Engineering

7 Agricultural Engineering 47 | Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

8 Agricultural Technology 48 | Civil Engineering and Planning

9 Agriculture Engineering * # 49 | Civil Engineering Environment and Pollution Control

10 ‘| Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 50 | Civil and Water Management Engineering

11 Airline Management 51 | Civil Engineering

12 | Apparel and Production Management 52 | Civil Engineering with Computer Application

13 | Applied Electronics and 53 | Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)
Communications

14 | Applied Electronics and 54 | Civil Environmental Engineering
instrumentation Engineering

15 | Architectural Assistantship 55 | Civil Technology

16 | Architecture and Interior Decoration 56 |Computer and Communication Engineering

17 | Artificial Intelligence (Al) and Data 57 |Computer Engineering
Science*

18 | Artificial Intelligence and Machine 58 |Computer Engineering (Software Engineering)
Learning*

19 | Automation Engineering 59 |Computer Engineering and Application

20 | Automobile Engineering 60 |Computer Networking

21 Automobile Maintenance Engineering 61 |Computer Science and Applied Mathematics

22 | Automation and Robotics* 62 |Computer Science and Biosciences

23 | Automotive Technology 63 | Computer Science and Design*

24 | Biomedical and Robotic Engineering* 64 |Computer Science and Business Systems*

25 | Biochemical Engineering 65 |Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber Security)*

26 _| Bioelectronics Engineering 66 |Computer Science and Engineering

27 | Bioinformatics 67  |Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial Intelligence)*

28 | Biomedical Engineering 68 | Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial Intelligence

and Machine Learning)*
29 | Biomedical instrumentation 69 |Computer Science and Engineering (Data Science)*
30 | Biotechnology 70 |Computer Science and Engineering (Internet of Things and
Cyber Security Including Block Chain Technology)*

31 Biotechnology and Biochemical 71. |Computer Science and Engineering (Internet of Things)*
Engineering

32 | Building and Construction Technology | 72 {Computer Science and Engineering (Networks)*

33 | Carpet and Textile Technology 73 |Computer Science and Engineering and Business Systems*

34 |Cement and Ceramic Technology 74  |Computer Science and information Technology

35 | Ceramic Engineering and Technology 75 |Computer Science and Medical Engineering

36 | Ceramic Technology 76 |Computer Science and Social Sciences

37 | Ceramics Engineering 77 _|Computer Science and Systems Engineering

38 | Chemical Engineering (Desalination 78 |Computer Science and Technology
and Water Treatment)

39 | Chemical and Biochemical 79  |Computer Technology
Engineering

40 | Chemical and Electro Chemical 80 | Computing in Multimedia
Engineering

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 136 ---
81 | Computing in Software 122 | Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering

82 | Construction Automation* 123 | Electronics and Telematics Engineering
83 | Construction Engineering 124 | Electronics Communication and Instrumentation
Engineering

84 | Construction Engineering and Management | 125 | Electronics Design Technology

85 | Construction Technology 126 | Electronics Engineering

86 | Construction Technology and Management | 127 | Electronics Instrument and Control

87 | Cyber Physical Systems* 128 | Electronics Instrumentation and Control

Engineering

88 | Dairy Engineering 129 | Electronics System Engineering

89 | Dairy Technology 130 | Electronics Technology

90 | Digital Techniques For Design and Planning _| 131 | Energy and Environmental Management

91 | Dyestuff Technology 132 | Energy Engineering*

92 | Electrical and Computer Engineering 133 | Environment Engineering

93 | Electrical and Electronics (Power System) 134 | Environmental Engineering*

94 | Electrical and Electronics Engineering 135 | Environmental Science and Engineering

95 | Electrical and instrumentation Engineering _ | 136 | Environmental Science and Technology

96 | Electrical and Power Engineering 137 | Facilities and Services Planning

97 | Electrical Engineering 138 | Fashion and Apparel Engineering

98 | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and 139 | Fashion Technology
Power)

99 | Electrical instrumentation and Control 140 | Fibres and Textiles Processing Technology
Engineering

100 | Electrical Power Engineering 141 | Fire Engineering

101 | Electrical, Electronics and Power Engineering | 142 | Fire Technology and Safety

102 | Electronic Engineering 143 | Fisheries Engineering

103 | Electronic Instrumentation and Control 144 | Food Engineering and Technology
Engineering

104 | Electronic Science and Engineering 145 | Food Processing and Preservation

105 | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering 146 | Food Processing Technology*

106 | Electronics and Communication 147 | Food Technology

(Communication System Engineering)
107 | Electronics and Communication Engineering | 148 | Food Technology and Management
108 | Electronics and Communication Engineering | 149 | Footwear Technology

(Bio-Medical Engineering)
109 | Electronics and Communication Engineering | 150 | Geo informatics
(Industry Integrated)
110 | Electronics and Communication Engineering | 151 | Geospatial Technology and Geoinformatics
(Microwaves)

111 | Electronics and Communication Technology | 152 | Handloom and Textile Technology*

112 | Electronics and Computer Engineering 153 | Industrial and Production Engineering
113 | Electronics and Computer Science 154 | Industrial Biotechnology
114 | Electronics and Control Systems 155 | Industrial Engineering
115 | Electronics and Electrical Engineering 156 | Industrial Engineering and Management
116 | Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering | 157 | Industrial loT*
117 | Electronics and Power Engineering 158 | Industrial Production Engineering
118 | Electronics and Telecommunication 159 | Information and Communication Technology
119 | Electronics and Telecommunication 160 | Information Engineering
Engineering
120 | Electronics and Tele-Communication 161 | Information Science and Engineering
Engineering
121 | Electronics and Telecommunication 162 | Information Science and Technology
Engineering (Technologynician Electronic
Radio)

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 137 ---
163 | Information Technology 203 | Nano Science and Technology

164 | Information Technology and Engineering | 204 | Nano Technology

165 | Instrument Technology 205 | Naval Architecture and Ship Building Engineering
166 | Instrumentation and Control 206 | Nuclear Science and Technology
Engineering
167 | Instrumentation and Electronics 207 | Oil and Paint Technology
168 | Instrumentation Engineering 208 | Oil Technology
169 | Instrumentation Technology 209 | Oils, Oleochemicals and Surfactants Technology
170 | Jute and Fibre Technology 210 | Optics and Optoelectronics
171 | Leather Technology 211 | Packaging Technology
172 |Man Made Fibre Technology 212 | Paint Technology
173 | Man-Made Textile Technology 213 | Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery Engineering
174 | Manufacturing Engineering 214 | Petrochem Engineering
175 | Manufacturing Engineering and 215 | Petrochemical Engineering
Technology
176 | Manufacturing Process and 216 | Petrochemical Technology

Automation Engineering
177 | Manufacturing Science and Engineering | 217 | Petroleum Engineering

178 | Manufacturing Technology 218 | Petroleum Technology

179 | Marine Engineering 219 | Pharmaceutical Engineering

180 | Marine Technology 220 | Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical Technology

181 | Material Science and Technology 221 | Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology

182 | Mechanical and Automation 222 | Plastic and Polymer Engineering
Engineering*

183 | Mechanical and Mechatronics 223 | Plastic Technology
Engineering (Additive Manufacturing)

184 | Mechanical and Rail Engineering 224 | Plastics Engineering

185 | Mechanical and Smart Manufacturing 225 | Polymer Engineering

186 | Mechanical Engineering 226 | Polymer Engineering and Technology

187 | Mechanical Engineering (Automobile) 227 | Polymer Science and Chemical Technology

188 | Mechanical Engineering (Industry 228 | Polymer Science and Technology
Integrated)

189 | Mechanical Engineering 229 | Polymer Technology

(Manufacturing Engineering)

190 | Mechanical Engineering (Production) 230 | Poultry Technology

191 | Mechanical Engineering (Welding 231 | Power Electronics
Technology)
192 | Mechanical Engineering Automobile 232 | Power Electronics and instrumentation Engineering
193 | Mechanical Engineering Design 233 | Power Electronics Engineering
194 | Mechatronics Engineering 234 | Power Engineering
195 | Medical Electronics Engineering 235 | Precision Manufacturing
196 | Medical Lab Technology 236 | Printing and Packing Technology
197 | Metallurgical and Materials Engineering | 237 | Printing Technology
198 | Metallurgical Engineering 238 | Printing, Graphics and Packaging
199 | Metallurgy 239 | Production and industrial Engineering
200 | Metallurgy and Material Technology 240 | Production Engineering
201 | Mine Engineering 241 | Pulp Technology
202 | Mining Engineering 242 | Radio Physics and Electronics

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 138 ---
243 | Robotics and Artificial Intelligence* 253 | Structural Engineering

244 |Robotics and Automation* 254 |Surface Coating Technology

245 | Rubber and Plastics Technology 255 | Technical Textiles*

246 | Rubber Technology 256 |Telecommunication Engineering
247 | Safety and Fire Engineering 257 | Textile Chemistry

248 | Shipbuilding Engineering 258 | Textile Engineering

249 | Silk Technology 259 | Textile Plant Engineering

250 | Smart Agritech* 260 | Textile Processing

251 |Smart and Sustainable Energy* 261 | Textile Technology

252 | Software Engineering 262 | Tool Engineering

* Emerging / Multidisciplinary Area Nomenclatures

# Mandatory 18 Credits for loT

2.4 (A) Post Graduate Diploma in Engineering and Technology

SI. No Course Name SI. No Course Name
1 Cement Technology 7 Industrial Engineering
2 Chemical Engineering (Sugar Technology) 8 Mechanical Engineering (Production)
3 Computer Applications 9 Networking
4 Computer Engineering and Application 10 Plastics Processing and Testing
5 Computer Hardware and Networking 11 Sugar Technology
6 Food, Drug and Cosmetics 12 Web Designing

2.4 (B) Post Graduate Certificate in Engineering and Technology

Sl.No Name of the Course
1

Acoustic Survey

2 Artificial Intelligence and Data Science

| 103 | AICTE ‘+} APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 139 ---
2.5 Post Graduate Degree in Engineering and Technology

SI. No Course Name SI. No. Course Name
1 Advanced Communication and information System 42 | Bio Electronics
2 Advanced Computer Aided Design 43 Biochemical Engineering
3 Advanced Design and Manufacturing 44 | Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology
4 Advanced Electrical Power System 45 _| Bioinformatics
5 AdvancedElectronics 46 __| Biomedical Electronics
6 Advanced Electronics and Communication| 47 | Biomedical Engineering
Engineering
7 Advanced Manufacturing and Mechanical] 48 | Biomedical Instrumentation
Systems Design
8 Advanced Manufacturing Systems 49 | Biomedical Instrumentation and
Signal Processing
9 Advanced Manufacturing Technology 50 | Biomedical Signal Processing and
instrumentation
10 __| Advanced Materials Technology 51 Biometrics and Cyber Security
11 Advanced Production Systems 52 _| Bioprocess Engineering
12__| Aero Dynamic Engineering 53 Bioprocess Technology
13 __ | Aero Space Engineering 54 __| Biotechnology
14 __| Aero Space Technology 55 Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering
15 | Aeronautical Engineering 56 _| Building Construction Technology
16 | Agricultural Engineering 57. | CAD/CAM
17__| Agricultural Science and Technology 58 | CAD/CAM Engineering
18 | Air Armament 59 CAD/CAM/CAE
19 _| Apparel Technology 60 _| CAD/CAM Robotics
20 __| Applied Electronics 61 Ceramic Engineering and Technology
21 Applied Electronics and Communication System 62 | Ceramics Engineering
22 | Applied Electronics and Communications 63 _| Chemical and Biotechnology
23 | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation 64 | Civil and Environmental Technology
Engineering
24 | Applied instrumentation 65 | Chemical Engineering
25 | Applied Mechanics 66 | Chemical Processing in Textiles
26 | Armament Engineering (GunFitter) 67 Chemical Reaction Engineering
27 _| Artificial Intelligence# 68 | Chemical Science and Technology
28 | Artificial Intelligence and Data Science 69 _| Chemical Technology
29 Atmospheric Science 70 Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)
30 | Automated Manufacturing Systems 71 Civil (Construction Engineering and
Management)
31 Automation 72 Civil (Public Health and Environment)
Engineering
32 Automation and Control Power Systems 73 Civil (Structural Engineering)
33 Automation and Robotics 74 Civil(WaterResourceEngineering)
34 | Automobile Engineering 75 _| Civil Engineering
35 | Automobile Technology 76 | Civil Engineering (Computer Aided
Structural Engineering)
36 _| Automotive Electronics 77 _| Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)
37 | Automotive Engineering 78 | Civil Engineering (Environmental and
Pollution Control)
38 _| Automotive Systems 79 Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)
39 _| Automotive Technology 80 Civil Engineering (Transportation Engineering)
40 __| Avionics 81 Civil Engineering (Water Management)
41 Aviation Technology 82 | Civil Environmental Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 140 ---
83 |Cloud Computing 121 |Computer Engineering and Networking
84 |Combat Equipment Technology 122 |Computer Hardware and Networking
85 |Combat Vehicles (Mechanical Engineering) 123 |Computer integrated Manufacturing
86 |Communication and Information Systems 124 |Computer Network Engineering
87 |Communication and Networking 125 |Computer Networking
88 |Communication and Signal Process 126 |Computer Networking and Engineering
89 |Communication Control and Networking 127 |Computer Networks
90 |Communication Engineering 128 |Computer Networks and information Security
91 |Communication Engineering and Signal 129 |Computer Networks and internet Security
Processing
92 |Communication Networks 130 |Computer Science
93 |Communication Systems 131 |Computer Science and Engineering
94 |Communication Technology and Management | 132 |Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning)
95 |Communications Engineering 133 |Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber
Security)
96 |Computational Analysis in Mechanical Science | 134 |Computer Science and Engineering (Networks)
97 |Computational Biology 135 |Computer Science and Engineering (Operations
Research)
98 |Computational Engineering and Networking 136 |Computer Science and Information Security
(Data Science)
99 |Computational Mechanics 137 |Computer Science and Information System
100 |Computational Mechanics (Mechanical 138 |Computer Science and Information Technology
Engineering)
101 |Computer Aided Analysis and Design 139 |Computer Science and Systems Engineering
102 |Computer Aided Design 140 |Computer Science and Technology
103 |Computer Aided Design and Computer Aided | 141 |Computer Systems and Technology
Manufacture
104 |Computer Aided Design and Manufacture 142 |Computer Science Engineering (Big Data
Analytics)
105 |Computer Aided Design Manufacture and 143 |ComputerTechnology
Automation
106 |Computer Aided Design Manufacture and 144 |ComputerTechnologyand Applications
Engineering
107 |Computer Aided Design of Structures 145 |Computer Vision and Image Processing
108 |Computer Aided Process Design 146 |Computing in Computing
109 |Computer Aided Structural Analysis and Design| 147 |Construction and Project Management
110 |Computer Aided Structural Engineering 148 |Construction Engineering
111 |Computer and Communication 149 |Construction Engineering and Management
112 |Computer and Communication Engineering 150 |Construction Management
113 |Computer and information Science 151 |Construction Planning and Management
114 |Computer and Information Technology 152 |Construction Project Management
115 |Computer Applications 153 |Construction Technology
116 |Computer Applications in Industrial Drives 154 |Construction Technology and Management
117 |Computer Cognition and Technology 155 |Control and Instrument
118 |Computer Engineering 156 |Control and Instrumentation
119 |Computer Engineering (Software Engineering) | 157 |Control Engineering
120 |Computer Engineering and Application 158 |Control System Engineering

AICTE “¥5

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 141 ---
159 | Control Systems 202 | Electrical and Power Engineering

160 | Cryogenic Engineering 203 | Electrical Devices and Power Systems

161 | Cyber Forensics 204 | Electrical Drives and Control

162 | Cyber Forensics and information Security | 205 | Electrical Energy Systems

163 | Cyber Security 206 | Electrical Engineering

164 | Cyber Security Systems and Networks 207 | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

165 | Data Engineering 208 | Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)

166 | Dairy Technology 209 | Electrical instrumentation and Control Engineering

167 | Data Sciences 210 | Electrical Machines

168 | Defence Technology 211 | Electrical Machines and Drives

169 | Design and Production 212 | Electrical Power Engineering

170 | Design and Thermal Engineering 213 | Electrical Power System

171 | Design Engineering 214 | Electronic Circuits and System Design

172 | Design for Manufacturing 215 | Electronic Engineering

173 | Design of Mechanical Equipment 216 | Electronic instrumentation and Control Engineering

174 | Design of Mechanical Systems 217 | Electronics and Communication
(Communication System Engineering)

175 | Digital Communication 218 | Electronics and Communication (Signal Processing
and Communication)

176 | Digital Communication Engineering 219 | Electronics and Communication (Signal Processing
and VLSI Technology)

177 | Digital Communications 220 | Electronics and Communication (VLSI Design)

178 | Digital Communications and Networking | 221 | Electronics and Communication (VLSI System Design)

179 | Digital Electronics 222 | Electronics and Communication (Wireless
Communication Systems and Networks)

180 | Digital Electronics and Communication 223 | Electronics and Communication (Wireless
Communication Technology)

181 | Digital Electronics and Communication Engineering | 224 | Electronics and Communication Engineering

182 | Digital Electronics and 225 | Electronics and Communication Engineering
Communication Systems (Industry integrated)
183 | Digital Electronics Engineering 226 | Electronics and Electrical Technology
184 | Digital Image Processing 227 | Electronics and instrumentation Engineering
185 | Digital Instrumentation 228 | Electronics and Tele-Communication Engineering
186 | Digital Signal Processing 229 | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
(Radioand System)
187 | Digital Systems 230 | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
(Technology nician Electronic Radio)
188 | Digital Systems and Communications 231 | Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering
Engineering

189 | Digital Systems and Computer Electronics| 232 | Electronics Communication and instrumentation Engineering
190 | Digital Techniques and instrumentation 233 | Electronics Design and Technology

191 | Distributed and Mobile Computing 234 | Electronics Design Technology

192 | Distributed Computing Systems 235 | Electronics Engineering

193 | Distributed Systems 236 | Electronics Product Design and Technology
194 | Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 237 | Electronics Systems and Communication
195 | Dyestuff Technology 238 | Electronics Technology

196 | Earthquake Engineering 239 | Electronics Tele Communication

197 | E-Learning Technologies 240 | Electric Vehicle Technology

198 | Electric Power System 241 | Embedded and Real Time Systems

199 | Electrical and Electronics (PowerSystem) | 242 | Embedded Control and Automation

200 | Electrical and Electronics Engineering 243 | Embedded Control Systems

201 | Electrical and Mechanical Engineering 244 | Embedded System and Computing

AICTE ‘$y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 142 ---
245| Embedded System and VLSI 293 | Future Studies and Planning

246| Embedded System and VLSI Design 294 | Gas Turbine Technology

247| Embedded Systems 295 | Geolnformatics

248| Embedded Systems Technologies 296 | Geoinformatics and Earth Observation
249| Energetic Materials and Polymers 297 | Geo Informatics and Surveying Technology
250] Energyand Environmental Engineering 298 | Geomachines and Structures

251| Energy and Environmental Management 299 | Geomechanics and Structures

252| Energy Engineering 300 | Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Energy
253 | Energy Management 301 | Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering
254| Energy Science and Technology 302 | Geotechnical Engineering

255 | Energy Systems 303 | Geotechnology

256| Energy Systems Analysis and Design 304 | Green Energy Technology

257 | Energy Systems and Management 305 | Green Technology

258| Energy Systems Engineering 306 | Guidance and Navigation Control

259| Energy Technology 307 | Guided Missiles

260| Energy Technology and Management 308 | Health Science and Water Engineering

261 | Engineering Analysis and Design 309 | Heat and Power

262 | Engineering and Management 310 | Heat Power and Thermal Engineering

263 | Engineering Design 311 | Heat Power Engineering

264 | Engineering Education 312 | Heat Ventilation and Air Conditioning

265 | Engineering Statistics 313. | High Voltage and Power Systems Engineering
266 | Environment and Water Resource Engineering 314 | High Voltage Engineering

267 | Environment Engineering 315. | Highway Engineering

268 | Environmental Biotechnology 316 | Highway Technology

269 | Environmental Engineering 317 | Hill Area Development Engineering

270| Environmental Engineering and Management 318 | Hydraulics and Flood Control

271 | Environmental Management 319 | Hydraulics Engineering

272 | Environmental Science and Engineering 320 | Hydrology and Water Resources Engineering
273 | Environmental Science and Technology 321 | Industrial Intelligent Systems

274| E-Security 322 | I.T. (Courseware Engineering)

275 | Farm Machinery 323 | Illumination Engineering

276| Fashion and Apparel Engineering 324 | Illumination Technology and Design

277 | Fashion Technology 325 | Image Processing

278 | Financial Engineering 326 | Industrial and Production Engineering
279| Food Biotechnology 327 | Industrial Automation and RF Engineering
280 | Food Engineering and Technology 328 | Industrial Automation and Robotics

281 | Food Plant Operations Management 329 | Industrial Biotechnology

282 | Food Process Engineering and Management 330 | Industrial Catalysis

283 | Food Processing Technology 331 | Industrial Design

284 | Food Safety and Quality Management 332 | Industrial Drives and Control

285 | Food Supply Chain Management 333 | Industrial Electronics

286 | Food Technology 334 | Industrial Engineering

287 | Food Technology and Management 335 | Industrial Engineering and Management
288 | Footwear Science and Engineering 336 | Industrial Instrumentation and Control
289 | Foundation Engineering 337 | Industrial Mathematics

290 | Foundry and Forge Technology 338 | Industrial Metallurgy

291 | Fracture Mechanics 339 | Industrial Pollution Control

292 | Fueland Combustion 340 | Industrial Power Control and Drives

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 143 ---
341 | Industrial Refrigeration and Cryogenics 387 | Manufacturing and Automation
342 | Industrial Safety 388 | Manufacturing Engineering
343 | Industrial Safety and Engineering 389 | Manufacturing Engineering and Automation
344 | Industrial Structures 390 | Manufacturing Engineering and Management
345 | Industrial System and Drives 391 _| Manufacturing Engineering and Technology
346 | Industrial Systems Engineering 392 | Manufacturing Process
347 nformation and Communication Technology 393 Manufacturing Process and Automation
Engineering
348 | Information Engineering 394 | Manufacturing Science and Engineering
349 | Information Science and Technology 395 | Manufacturing Systems and Management
350 | Information Security 396 | Manufacturing Systems Engineering
351 | Information Security Management 397 | Manufacturing Technology
352 nformationSystems 308 Manufacturing Technology and
Automation
353 | Information Technology 399 | Marine Engineering
354 nformation Technology (Artificial Intelligence 400 Marine Technology
and Robotics)
355 | Information Technology (Information and Cyber Warfare) | 401 | Material Engineering
356 | InformationTechnology(Multimedia) 402_| Material Engineering (Nanotechnology)
357 | InformationTechnology andEngineering 403 | Material Handling
358 | InfrastructureEngineering 404 | Material Science and Chemical Technology
359 | InfrastructureEngineering andManagement 405 _| Material Science and Engineering
360 | Infrastructure EngineeringandTechnology 406 | Material Science andTechnology
361 | Infrastructure Management 407 | Materials Engineering
362 | Instrumentation and Control (Applied Instrumentation)| 408 | Measurement and Control
Instrumentation and Control Engineering Mechanical (Computer Aided Design,
363 409 . .
Manufacture and Engineering)
Instrumentation and Electronics 1 Mechanical (Computer integrated
364 410 .
Manufacturing)
Instrumentation Engineering 1 Mechanica I(I.C. Engine and
365 411 . . .
Automobile Engineering)
366 | Instrumentation Technology 412 | Mechanical and Automation Engineering
367 | Integrated Circuits Technology 413_| Mechanical and Materials Technology
368 | Integrated Power Systems 414 | Mechanical Engineering
369 | Integrated Water Resources Management 415_| Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM)
370 | Intelligent Systems 416 _| Mechanical Engineering (Cyber Physical Systems)
371 Internal Combustion and Automobiles 417 Mechanical Engineering (Energy System
and Management)
372 | Internal Combustion Engineering 418 | Mechanical Engineering (Industry Integrated)
373 | Internal Combustion Engines andTurbo Machinery} 419 | Mechanical Engineering (Manufacturing Technology)
374 | Internet of Things 420 | Mechanical Engineering (Production)
375 | loT and Sensor Systems 421 | Mechanical Engineering (Thermal Engineering)
376 | Irrigationand Drainage Engineering 422 _| Mechanical Engineering Automobile
377 | Irrigation Engineering 423 | Mechanical Engineering Design
378 | Irrigation Water Management 424 | Mechanical Engineering Production
379 | Laser and Electro Optics 425 | Mechanical Engineering (CAD)
Laser Technology Mechanical Engineering-Product Design
380 426 and Development
381 | Lean Manufacturing Engineering 427 | Mechanical-Product Life Cycle Management
382 | Leather Technology 428 | Mechanical System Design
383 | Machine Design 429 | Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal Engineering
384 | Machine Design and Robotics 430 | Mechanical-Manufacturing Engineering
385 _| Maintenance Engineering 431 | Mechatronics
386 | Man-Made Textile Technology 432 _| Medical Electronics

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 144 ---
433] Metallurgical and Materials Engineering 479 | Optoelectronics andLaserTechnology

434] Metallurgical Engineering 480 | Opto-Electronics Engineering

435| Metallurgy 481 | Opto-Electronics-Optical Communication
436| Metallurgy and Material Technology 482 | Packaging Technology

437| Microand Nano Electronics 483 | Paint Technology

438| Micro Electronics 484 | Parallel Distributed Systems

439| Micro Electronics and Control Systems 485 | Perfumery and Flavour Technology

440] MicroElectronics and VLSI Design 486 | Pervasive Computing Technology

441| Micro Electronics and VLSI Technology 487 | Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery Engineering
442] Micro Electronics Engineering 488 | Petrochemical Engineering

443] Microelectronics and VLSI Design 489 | Petrochemical Technology

444] Microwave and Communication Engineering 490 | Petroleum Engineering

445| Microwave and Millimeter Engineering 491 | Petroleum Refining and Petrochemicals
446| Microwave and Optical Communication 492 | Petroleum Technology

447| Microwave and Radar Engineering 493 | Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

448] Microwave and TV Engineering 494 | Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical Technology
449| Microwave Engineering 495 | Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
450| Microwaves 496 | Physical Metallurgy

451| Mining Engineering 497 | Plant Design

452| Mobile Communication and NetworkTechnology| 498 | Plastic Engineering

453] Mobile Computing 499 | Plastics Engineering

454| Mobile Computing Technology 500 | Plastics Processing and Testing

455| Mobile Technology 501 | Plastics Technology

456| Modeling and Simulation 502 | Polymer Engineering

457| Modern Communication Engineering 503 | Polymer Nanotechnology

458] Multimedia and Software Engineering 504 | Polymer Science and Engineering

459| Multimedia Technology 505 | Polymer Science and Technology

460| Nano Science and Technology 506 | Polymer Technology

461| Nano Technology 507 | Power and Energy Engineering

462] Network Engineering 508 | Power and Energy System

463] Network infrastructure Management 509 | Power and Industrial Drives

464| Network Security and Management 510 | Power Control and Drives

465] Networking 511 | Power Electronics

466| Networking and internet Engineering 512 | Power Electronics and Control

467| Neural Networks 513 | Power Electronics and Drives

468| New Material Process and Technology 514 | Power Electronics and Drives in Electrical Engineering
469| Non-Sewered Sanitation 515 | Power Electronics and Electrical Drives
470] Nuclear Engineering 516 | Power Electronics and Machine Drives

471| Nuclear Science and Technology 517 | Power Electronics and Power Systems

472| Ocean Technology 518 | Power Electronics and Systems

473] OilTechnology 519 | Power Electronics Engineering

474| Oils, Oleo chemicals and Surfactants Technology | 520 | Power Engineering

475] Optical Engineering 521 | Power Engineering and Energy Systems
476| Optics and Optoelectronics 522 | Power Plant Engineering and Energy Management
477| Opto-Electronics and Communication Systems 523 | Power System and Control

478] Opto-Electronics and Communication 524 | Power System and ControlAutomation

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 145 ---
525 | Power System Control and Automation 569 | Robotics and Mechatronics

526 | Power System with Emphasis H.V. Engineering | 570 | Rocket Propulsion

527 | Power Systems 571 | Rubber Technology

528 | Power Systems and Automation 572 | Robotics and Artificial Intelligence*

529 | Power Systems and Power Electronics 573 | Rural Technology

530 | Power Systems and Renewable Energy 574 | Sciencein Software Engineering

531 | Power Systems Control and Automation Engineering | 575 | Scientific Computing

532 | Power Systems Engineering 576 | Seismic Design and Earthquake Engineering

533 | Pre Stressed Concrete 577 | Sensor Technology

534 | Printing Engineering and Graphics Communication| 578 | Signal Processing

535 | Printing Technology 589 | Signal Processing and Communications

536 | Process and Food Engineering 580 | Signal Processing and Embedded Systems

537 Process Control 581 Smart Sensing Communication and
Networking Technologies

538 | Printing and packaging Technology 582 | Software Engineering

539 | Process Controlinstrumentation 583 | Software Systems

540 | Process Dynamics and Control 584 | Soil and Water Conservation Engineering

541 | Process instrumentation 585 | Soil Mechanics

542 | Process Metallurgy 586 | Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering

543 | Product Design 587 | Solar Energy

544 | Product Design and Commerce 588 | Solar Power Systems

545 | Product Design and Development 589 | Spatial information Technology

546 | Product Design and Manufacturing 590 | Sports Technology

547 | Production and Industrial Engineering 591 | Structural and Construction Engineering

548 | Production Design and Manufacturing 592 | Structural and Foundation Engineering

549 | Production Engineering 593 | Structural Design

550 | Production Engineering and Engineering Design | 594 | Structural Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering

551 | Production Engineering System Technology 595 | Structural Engineering

552 | Production Management 596 | Structural Engineering and Construction

553 | Production Technology 597 | Structural Engineering and Construction Management

554 | Production Technology and Management 598 | Surface CoatingTechnology

555 | Project Management 599 | System and Network Security

556 | Propulsion Engineering 600 | System Management

557 | Public Health Engineering 601 | System Software

558 | Quality Engineering and Management 602 | Systems and Signal Processing

559 | Radar and Communication 603 | Technical Textile

560 | Radio Frequency and Microwave Engineering 604 | Technology Management

561 | Radio Physics and Electronics 605 | Telecommunication Engineering

562 | Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 606 | Telematics

563 | Reliability Engineering 607 | Textile Chemistry

564 | Remote Sensing 608 | Textile Engineering

565 | Remote Sensing and GIS 609 | Textile Processing

566 | Remote Sensing and Wireless Sensor Networks | 610 | Textile Processing Technology

567 | Renewable Energy 611 | Textile Technology

568 | Robotics and Automation 612 | Textile Technology (Design and Manufacturing)

AICTE

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

[11
--- Page 146 ---
613 | Thermal and Fluid Engineering 637 | VLSI Design

614 | Thermal Engineering 638 | VLSI Design and Embedded Systems

615 Thermal Engineering (Refrigeration and Air 639 VLSI Design and Signal Processing
Conditioning)

616 | Thermal Power Engineering 640 | VLSI Design and Testing

617 | Thermal Science Engineering 641 | VLSI System Design

618 | Thermal Sciences and EnergySystems 642 | VLSI Systems

619 Thermal Systems and Design 643 Waste Water Management, Health and Safety

Engineering

620 | Tool Design 644 | Water and Environmental Technology

621 | Tool Engineering 645 | Water Engineering and Management

622 | Town and Country Planning 646 | Water Resource Engineering

623 | Traffic and Transporting Engineering 647 | Water Resource Management

624 | Transport Science and Technology 648 | Water Resources and Environmental Engineering

625 | Transportation Engineering 649 | Water Resources and Hydraulic Engineering

626 | Translational Engineering 650 | Water Resources and Hydroinformatics

627 | Transportation Engineering and Management | 651 | Weapons Engineering

628 | Transportation System Engineering 652 | Web Technologies

629 | Tribology and Maintenance 653 | Wired and Wireless Communication

630 | Turbo Machinery 654 | Wireless and Mobile Communications

631 | Urban Engineering 655 | Wireless Communication and Computing

632 | Virtual Proto typing and Digital Manufacturing] 656 | Wireless Communication Technology

633 | VLSI 657 | Wireless Communications

634 | VLSI and Embedded Systems 658 | Wireless Networks and Applications

635 | VLSI and Embedded Systems Design 659 | Wireless Technology

636 | VLSI and Microelectronics

#Only as a Collaborative Course in association with DRDO. More details about this Course and similar
courses which can be offered in collaborative mode is available@www.aicte-india.org.

NOTE: All PG programs being specialized and Emerging in the respective engineering branches, are permitted
as Emerging/ Multidisciplinary areas. Institutions/Universities are expected to revise the curricula regularly for
being industry relevant in line with NEP 2020.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 147 ---
2.6 Under Graduate Degree in Planning

SI. No. Name of the Course

1

[Planning

2.7 Post Graduate Degree in Planning

SI. No. Name of the Course SI. No. Name of the Course
1 City and Regional Planning and Management 14 | Regional Planning
2 City Planning 15 |Rural Planning and Development
3 City Planning and Management 16 | Rural Planning and Management
4 |Community Planning 17. |Town and Country Planning
5 Conservation Planning 18 | Town Planning
6 Environmental Planning 19 | Transport Planning and Management
7 Environmental Planning and Management 20 | Transportation Planning
8 Housing 21 Urban and Regional Planning
9 Industrial Area Planning and Management 22 | Urban and Rural Planning
10 ‘| Infrastructure Planning 23 | Urban Design
11 {Infrastructure Planning and Management 24 |Urban Development
12 |Land-Use Planning 25 | Urban Planning
13 |Regional and Rural Development Planning

2.8 Diploma in Applied Arts Crafts and Design

SI. No. Name of the Course SI. No. Name of the Course
1 Apparel Design and Fabrication Technology 13 | Fashion Design and Garment Technology
2 Apparel Design and Fashion Technology 14 | Fashion Designing
3 Art for Drawing Teacher 15 | Fashion Technology
4 Beauty and Hair Dressing 16 | Fine Arts
5 Beauty Culture 17 | Garment Technology
6 Beauty Culture and Cosmetology 18 |Home Science
7 Commercial Art 19 | Interior Decoration
8 Cosmetology 20 | Interior Design
9 Costume Design and Dress Making 21 | Textile Design
10 |Costume Design and Garment Technology 22 | Textile Designing
11. | Craft Technology 23 ‘| Travel and Tourism
12. | Fashion and Apparel Design

2.9 Post Diploma in Applied Arts and Crafts

S. No. Name of the Course
1 Fine Arts
2 Textile Designing

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 148 ---
2.10 Under Graduate Degree in Applied Arts and Crafts

SI. No. Name of the Course SI. No. Name of the Course

Accessory Design 17 Fine Art (Animation)

2 Animation 18 Fine Art (Ceramics)

3 Applied Arts 19 Fine Art (Metal Craft)

4 Applied Arts and Crafts (Fashion and Apparel 20 ‘| Fine Art (Photography)
Design)

5 AR and CR for Films 21 Gaming Technology

6 Audiography 22 |Media Production Management

7 Cinematography 23 Painting

8 Commercial Art 24 | Product Design

9 Digital Imaging 25 ‘|Screen Acting

10 | Fashion and Apparel Design 26 = ‘| Script Writing

11 | Film and Media 27 _|Sound Recording and Sound Design

12 | Film and Television 28 ‘| Television

13 |Film Direction 29 ‘|Textile Design

14 | Film Editing 30 ‘| Visual Effects

15 | Fine Arts 31 Virtual Production

16 |Fine Art (Sculpture)

2.11 Post Graduate Degree in Applied Arts and Craft

SI. No. Name of the Course SI. No. Name of the Course
1 Advertisement and Public Relation 12 | Film Studies
2 | Applied Arts 13 | Fine Art (Painting)
3 Applied Art (Visual Communication 14 | Fine Art (Mural)
Design)
4 Applied Art (Communication Design) 15 | Fine Art (Sculpture)
5 Applied Art (Illustration) 16 | Fine Art (Photography and Media Communication)
6 Customer Service Management 17 | Fine Arts
7 |Direction 18 | Painting Mural
8 | Electronic Cinematography 19 |Sound Recording and Television Engineering
9 |Fashion Technology 20 |Video Editing
10 | Feature Film Screenplay Writing 21 | Visual Communication and Communication Design
11 | Film Archiving

2.12 Diploma in Design

SI. No. Name of the Course
1 Design

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 149 ---
2.13 Under Graduate Degree in Design

SI. No. Name of the Course

Communication Design
Design

Industrial Design
Interaction Design
Textile Design

MW) Bl]WIN|-

2.14 Post Graduate Degree in Design

SI.No. Name of the Course Sl.No. Name of the Course

1 Animation Design 22 | Graphic Design

2 Animation Film Design 23 | Heritage Design

3. | Apparel Design 24 |Human Centered Design

4 Business Design 25 _|Immersive Media Design

5 Business Services and System Design 26 | Industrial Arts and Design Practices
6 | Ceramic and Glass Design 27 | Information Arts and Information Design Practice
7 |Creative and Applied Computation 28 | Information Design

8 Communication Design 29  |Interaction Design

9 Design Computation 30 | Lifestyle Accessory Design

10 | Design Education 31 | Media Arts

11 | Design for Retail Experience 32 |New Media Design

12. | Design Led Innovation 33 | Photography Design

13 |Design Management 34 | Product Design

14 | Digital Game Design 35 | Public Space Design

15 | Digital Humanities 36 | Social Design

16 | Earth Education and Communication 37 | Textile Design

17. | Exhibition Design 38 | Toy & Game Design

18 | Experimental Media Arts 39 | Transportation and Mobility Design
19 | Fashion Management and Marketing 40 | Universal Design

20 | Film and Video Communication 41 | User Experience Design

21 ‘| Film and Video Design 42 |Visual Communication and Strategic Branding

2.15 Diploma in Hotel Management and Catering Technology

SI. No. Name of the Course

1 Food Technology

Hospitality and Tourism Administration

Hotel Management

Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Travel and Tourism

MW) Rl WIN

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 150 ---
2.16 Under Graduate Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology

SI.No. Name of the Course

1 Culinary Arts

Hospitality and Tourism Administration

2
3 Hotel Management
4

Hotel Management and Catering Technology

2.17 Post Graduate Degree in Hotel Management and Catering Technology

1 Food and Beverage Management
2 Hospitality and Tourism Administration
3 Hotel Management

2.18 Post Graduate Degree in Computer Applications

SI. No. Name of the Course
1 Computer Applications

2.19 Post Graduate Certificate/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree/
Fellow Programme in Management

Sl.No. Name of the Course SI.No. Name of the Course

1 Advertising and Marketing Communication 23 | Corporate Communication and Event Management
2 | Advertising and Public Relation 24 | Corporate Social Responsibility

3. | Agribusiness and Plantation Management 25 |Cyber Law

4 | Agribusiness Management 26 | Design Thinking

5 | Agricultural Export and Business Management 27 | Dietetics

6 | Airport Management 28 | Digital Marketing

7 | Apparels 29 | Digital Media and Marketing Communications
8 | Artificial Intelligence and Data Science 30 | Digital Media and Online Journalism

9 | Aviation and Airport Management 31 | E-Business Management

10 | Aviation Management 32  |Energy Management

11 | Banking and Finance Management 33 | Entrepreneurship

12 | Banking and Financial Services 34 | Environmental Management

13 | Big Data Analytics 35 |Event Management

14 | Biotechnology 36 | Export and Import Management

15 | Business Administration 37 | Family Managed Business

16 | Business Analytics 38 | Fashion Technology

17 | Business and Corporate Law 39 | Finance

18 | Business Design and Innovation 40 | Finance Marketing and Human Resource
19 | Business Economics Management

20 | Business Management 41 | Financial Administration

21 |Communications 42 | Financial Management

22 | Consultancy Management 43 | Financial Services

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 151 ---
44 |Fintech 75 |Management
45 | Food Processing and Business Management 76 |Manufacturing Management
46 | Foreign Trade 77 |Marketing and Finance
47 | Forestry Management 78 |Marketing and Sales Management
48 | Geo Spatial Technology Application in Rural 79 |Marketing Management
Development 80 |Mass Communication
49 | Government Accounting and Internal Audit 81 | Materials Management
50 |Health Care Administration 82 | Media and Entertainment
51 |Health Care and Hospital Management 83 | Operations Management
52 | Healthcare Management 84 | Personnel Administration
53 | Heritage Management 85 | Pharmaceutical Management
54 |Home Textiles 86 | Project Management
55 | Hospital Administration 87 | Public Policy and Management
56 | Hospital and Health Care Management 88 | Public Systems
57 | Hospital Management 89 |Real Estate Management
58 | Hospitality Management 90 | Retail Management
59 |Human Resource Development 91__|Rural Management
60 |Human Resource Development and Management | 92 | Securities Market
61 _|Human Resource Management 93 _|Services Management
62 | Industrial Safety and Environmental Management | 94 | Shipping and Logistics Management
63 | Information Communication Technology in 95 |Social Enterprise Management
Securities Market 96 | Sports Management
64 _| Information Management 97 | Sustainability Management
65 | Information Technology 98 | Technology Management
66 | Information Technology and Systems Management| 99__| Telecom Management
67 _| Infrastructure Management 100 | Television and Radio Journalism / Production
68 | Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture 101 | Textile Management
Development (IEV)* 102 | Tourism Management
69 _| Insurance and Risk Management 103 | Transport and Logistics Management
70 _| International Business 104 | Transport Economics and Management
71 nternational Trade Management -
105 | Travel and Tourism
72 | Jute Technology and Management 106 | Tribal Development
73 |Law 107 |Waste Management and Social Entrepreneurship
74 | Logistics and Supply Chain Management

PGDM / MBA without any specialization in bracket refers general management ONLY. Hence, the GENERAL nomenclature will not be
available for PGDM / MBA. However, MBA institutions can opt if their affiliating University has already granted this nomenclature.
Institutions should use/name the course as PGDM/MBA and put specialized nomenclature as approved in brackets for all practical
purposes/communication.

* Approval shall be based on the fulfilment of eligibility criteria specified by the MoE's Innovation Cell

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 152 ---
2.20 Course Nomenclature of D.Voc and B.Voc

S.No Emerging Technologies Specialization - Courses

=

3D printing

Al & Robotics

Architectural Drafting and Basic 3D design

Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning & loT

Artificial Intelligence and Data Science

Big Data Analytics

Block Chain

Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality

Ol/OINIAD)| OI] BR] w]n

Cyber Security and Digital Forensics

=
Oo

Industrial Automation and Robotics

11 |Internet of Things

1 | Applied Arts

Programme

Engineering and Technology

Applied Arts

2 |Bamboo and Wood Technology

3 | Brass Metal Works

4 |Ceramics and Pottery Design

5 | Fashion Technology and Apparel Designing

6 |Gemmology

7 |Handloom Weaving Applied Arts and Crafts, Design
8 | Interior Design

9 | Jewellery Designing

10 | Recycled Craft Design

11 |Wood Working and Interiors

12 | Fashion Designing

13 | Film and Video Production Applied Arts and Crafts, Design /

Computer

14 |Commercial Aquaculture

15 | Dairy Technology

Engineering and Technology /
Management

16 |Seeds Production and Marketing

17 |Short Film and Video Production

18 | Office Automation

19 | Practical Accounting and Tax (DPATP) & Tally

Computer Applications

20 | Architecture Assistantship

21  |Automotive Manufacturing Technology

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 153 ---
22

Automobile Servicing

23

Biogas Technologies

24

Building Materials and Construction Skills

25

CNC Programming and Operation

26

Construction Technology

27

Design and Development of Electronic Devices

28 | Digital Manufacturing

29 | Electrical Skills

30 | Electronics Manufacturing Services

31 | Hospital Instrumentation and Management

32 |Industrial Electronics

33 | Industrial Microbiology

34 | Industrial Tool Manufacturing (ITM)

35 | Marine Technologies

36 |Manufacturing Skills

37 |Mechanical Manufacturing

38 |Mechatronics

39 |Metal Construction and Fabrication

40 |Mobile Communication

41 | Piping Technology

42 | Printing Technology Engineering and Technology
43 | Production Technology

44 |Production - Tool and Die Manufacturing

45 |Production-Press Tool and Die Maintenance & Stamping
46 | Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Skills

47 | Repair and Maintenance of Electric Vehicles

48 | Rubber Technology

49 | Small Hydropower Technologies

50 |Solar and Renewable Energy

51 |Solar PV Systems: Operation and maintenance

52 | Solar Technology

53 | Solar Thermal Systems: Operation and Management

54 | Technology Aided Chip Design

55 |Telecom and Electronics Skill

56 |Telecommunications

57  |Textile Manufacturing

58 | Tractor Repair and Servicing

59 |Unmanned Aerial Vehicles

60 |VLSI Design Skills

61 |Welding Technology

62 |Wind Power Technologies

63 | Agriculture Mechanization ; ,
64 | Green House Technology pavealture and Technology/
65 | Sericulture (Silkworm Farming & Production of Silk)

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 154 ---
66 | Animation and Graphic Design

67 |Computer Hardware

68 |Computer Networking

69 |Computer-Aided Design

70 |Data and Web Analytics

71 | Digital Media and Animation

72. | Forensic Science and Data Analytics

Engineering and Technology/ Computer
73 | Geoinformatics g g gy P

74 | Graphics and Multimedia
75 | Hardware and Networking

76 |Information Technology

77 | Software Development

78 |Web Design and Mobile Application Development

79 |Web Designing, Animation & Graphics

80 | Catering Technology and Hotel Management

81 | Food Processing and Quality Control Hotel Management

82 | Hospitality-Ethnic Foods and Sweets Processing

83 | Banking, Financial Services and Insurance (BFSI)

84 | Broadcasting and Journalism

85 | Digital Journalism and Multimedia Applications

86 | Entrepreneurship Development

87 | Financial Management

88 |Fire and Safety Management

89 | Fire Technology and Industrial Safety Management

90 |Innovative Waste Management

91  |Inventory Management Service and Production Planning

92 |Logistics Management Management

93 |Management-BPM and Analytics

94 |Management-Financial Services

95 | Operational Research and Risk Management

96 | Power Distribution Management

97 | Public Services

98 |Renewable Energy Management

99 | Retail Management

100 | Water, Sanitation and Waste Management

101 |Paramedical and Health Care Management, Pharmacy

102 | Tourism and Service Industry

- Management, Travel & Tourism
103 | Travel and Tourism

104 | Medical Image Technology

105 | Medical Laboratory Technology Pharmacy

106 |Wellness and Beauty care

NOTE: Any Vocational course NOT falling under the purview of AICTE Shall necessarily have to take approval of
concerned regulatory body prior to the commencement of course.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 155 ---
2.21 Vocational Courses : Stream Based Sector Specific Specialization

SI. No. Sector SI. No. Specialization Programme
1 Automobiles 1 Engine Testing Engg. & Tech.
2 |Vehicle Testing Engg. & Tech.
3 |Vehicle Quality Engg. & Tech.
4 | Auto Electrical and Electronics Engg. & Tech.
5 |Farm Equipment and Machinery Engg. & Tech.
2 | Entertainment 6 __|Theatre and Stage Craft Applied Arts and Crafts
3 Information 7 |Software Development Engg. & Tech.
Technology 8 | NIELIT Certified IT Professional Engg. & Tech.
4 _|Economics and 9 {Retail Management
Finance 10 | Banking Management
11 | Financial Planning Management
12 | Financial Services Management
13 | Logistics Management
5 |Communications 14 _|Mobile Communication Engg. & Tech.
15 _|Mobile Telecom System Engg. & Tech.
16 | Digital Switching Systems and Next Engg. & Tech.
Generation Networks
17__| Telecom Support Infrastructure Engg. & Tech.
18 | Microwave Stations Engg. & Tech.
19 | Broadband Networks Engg. & Tech.
20 | Optical Fiber Networks Engg. & Tech.
6 | Agriculture 21 | Farm Machinery and Power Engg. & Tech.
Engineering
22 | Soil and Water Conservation Engg. & Tech.
23 | Green House Technology Engg. & Tech.
24 | Renewable Energy Engg. & Tech.
25 _| Processing and Food Engineering Engg. & Tech.
7 |Construction 26 | Building Technology Engg. & Tech.
27 | Ceramic Tiles Engg. & Tech.
28 | Refractory Technology Engg. & Tech.
8 | Applied Arts 29 | Fashion Technology Applied Arts and Crafts
30 _|Interior Design Applied Arts and Crafts
31 | Jewellery Design Applied Arts and Crafts
9  |TravelandTourism | 32 | Tourism Management
10 | Printing and 33 | Printing Technology Engg. & Tech.
Publishing
11. | Paramedical and 34 |Cardiology Design
Healthcare 35 | Neurology Design
36 | Radiography Design
37 | Emergency Medical Services Design
38 | Laboratory Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
39 | Operation Theatre Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
40 |Optometry Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
41 |Medical Record Science and Health Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
Information
42 _|Endoscopy Applied Arts and Crafts/Design

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 120 |
--- Page 156 ---
43 _| Anesthesia and Critical Care Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
44 | Renal Dialysis Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
45 | Blood Bank Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
12 |ApparelandTextile] 46 | Fashion Design Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
47 |Textile Design Engg. & Tech.
48 | Apparel Manufacturing Engg. & Tech.
49 | Fashion Management Engg. & Tech.
13 | Culture 50 | Knowledge Heritage: A Model of Engg. & Tech.
Sanskrit Studies
51__|Intangible Cultural Heritage Management/ Engg. & Tech.
52 _|Museum Techniques Applied Arts and Crafts/Design
53 | Conservation Management/ Engg. & Tech.
54 |Traditional Design Engg. & Tech.
55 | Archaeology Engg. & Tech.
56 __| Expressive Culture Engg. & Tech.
57 | Cultural Informatics Engg. & Tech.
58 | Holistic Sciences in Sanskrit Engg. & Tech.
14 | Adventure Sports 59 | Water Based Adventure Engg. & Tech.
60 | Winter Sports and Skiing Engg. & Tech.
61 _|Land Based Adventure Management/ Engg. & Tech.
62 __| Aero Sports Engg. & Tech.
63 | Disaster Management Design
64 | Medical and First Aid Design
65 |Environment Management
15. |Mining and 66 | Excavation Machinery Design
Excavation 67 _|Opencast Mining Design/ Engg. & Tech.
68 | Dimensional Stone Design
69 | Underground Coal Mining Engg. & Tech.
70 |Underground Metalliferous Mining Engg. & Tech.
16 | Metallurgy 71 |Casting Development and Quality Engg. & Tech.
Assurance
72 _|Foundry Technology Engg. & Tech.
17__| Service 73. | Electronic Security Engg. & Tech.
18 |Manufacturing 74 | Machining Engg. & Tech.
19 |Leather and Life 75 | Foot Wear Design and Production Design
Style Product 76 _|Retail and Fashion Merchandise Design
Design and 77 | Business and Entrepreneurship Management
Development
78 __| Fashion Leather Accessories Design Design
79 | Creative Design - CAD/CAM Design/ Engg. & Tech.
80 __| Fashion Design Design
20 | Others 81 |Commercial and Computer Practice Engg. & Tech.
82 |Commercial Practice Engg. & Tech.
83 |Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG) Engg. & Tech.
84 | Modern Office Management Engg. & Tech.
85 | Modern Office Management and Engg. & Tech.
Secretarial Practices
86 | Modern Office Practice Engg. & Tech.
87 _|Stenography and Secretariat Practice | Engg. & Tech.

NOTE: Any Vocational course NOT fal

| 12 AICTE

ing under the purview of AICTE Shall necessarily have to take approval of
concerned regulatory body prior to the commen cement of course.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 157 ---
APPENDIX-3

Norms for Intake and Number of Courses/ Divisions in a
New Technical Institution

3.1 Diploma/ Post Diploma Level

Programme Intake Maximum number of Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate
per Course(s)/ Division(s) allowed in a Technical Institution
Division Course(s)/ Maximum Intake allowed
Division(s)
i |Engineering and Technology | 60/30 5/10 300
ii | Applied Arts and Crafts 30 3 90
iii |Design 30 3 90
iv |Hotel Management and 60 3 180
Catering Technology

*Number of Divisions For other Programmes, a MAXIMUM OF THREE DIVISIONS PER COURSE is permissible,
without exceeding the “Maximum Intake Allowed”

3.2 Under Graduate Level

Programme Intake Maximum number of Under Graduate Degree
per Course(s)/ Division(s) allowed in a Technical Institution
Division Course(s)/ Maximum Intake allowed
Division(s)
i |Engineering and Technology | 60/30 5/10 300
ii | Planning 40 3* 120
iii | Applied Arts and Crafts 30 3 90
iv |Design 30 5 150
v__|Hotel Management and 60 3 180
Catering Technology

*Number of Divisions for other Programmes, a MAXIMUM OF THREE DIVISIONS PER COURSE is permissible,
without exceeding the “Maximum Intake Allowed”

3.3 Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree Level

Programme Intake per Maximum number of Post Graduate Division(s) allowed

Division in a Technical Institution

Course(s)/ Maximum Intake allowed

Division(s)
i | Engineering and Technology 30° 5 150
ii |Planning** 30 1* 30
iii_ | Applied Arts and Crafts 30 3 90
iv |Design 15 3 45
v_|Hotel Management and 30 3 90
Catering Technology

vi |MCA 60 3* 180
vii | Management 60 5 300

*Number of Divisions
# Minimum of 6 seats in steps of 6 up to maximum 30
## Planning courses proposal based on NITI Ayog recommendations and budget announcement.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

122 |
--- Page 158 ---
For other Programmes, a MAXIMUM OF THREE DIVISIONS PER COURSE is permissible, without exceeding the
“Maximum Intake Allowed”

NOTE: One Division with Collaboration and Twinning is permissible in each Programme

State/ Central Universities or Autonomous Government Institutions offering Only Post Graduate Courses in
Engineering and Technology shall be granted a MAXIMUM of 5 Courses. Any additional Course(s) shall be
granted to such Institutions based on the valid National Board of Accreditation (NBA). The Institution shall have
“Nil Deficiency” based on Self-Disclosure as per the Deficiency Report generated through Web-Portal.

In Management Programme, the “Maximum Intake Allowed” shall comprise of various combinations of Intake
in PGCM/PGDM/MBA without exceeding 3 DIVISIONS in any single Course in any Level.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 159 ---
APPENDIX-4

Norms for Land and Built-up Area Requirements of the
Technical Institutions

4.1 Land Requirements for the Technical Institutions

Programme Land Area requirement in Acre

Diploma/ Post Diploma Under Graduate Institutions offering ONLY
Programmes Programmes Post Graduate Programmes
(MCA/ Post Graduate
Diploma/ MBA)

Megaand Urban Rural Megaand Urban Rural Megaand Urban Rural

Metro* Metro* Metro*
Engineering and $ 15 4.0 $ 25# | 7.5# - - -
Technology
Planning - - - $ 1.0 2.0 - - -
Applied Arts and $ 0.5 15 $ 0.5 15 - - -
Crafts
Design $ 1.0 2.0 $ 1.0 2.0 - - -
Hotel
Management
and Catering $ 1.0 2.0 $ 1.0 2.0 - - -
Technology
MCA - - - - - - $ 0.5 1.0
Management - - - - - - $ 0.5 1.0

* Mega and Metro Cities: Greater Mumbai (UA), Delhi (UA) and Kolkata (UA), Chennai (UA) Bangalore (UA),
Hyderabad (UA), Ahmedabad (UA), Pune (UA), Surat (UA) as per the Census of India 2011

$ For the Land area requirements the following conditions need to be adhered:

a. The Built-up area requirements as specified in the Approval Process Handbook (which is in-
force) are adhered to.

b. The Built-up area, achieved has to be approved by the concerned Development Authority
as per the latest Building Bye-Laws (Development Controls) in that City. A copy of certified
Building Bye-Laws be made available by the Applicant Institution. Copy of the approved Plan
from local statutory body and the completion Plan along with the Completion Certificate from
the same body, be also provided. The provisional Occupancy Certificate shall be considered
only for 2 consecutive Academic Years; after two years the only afore-mentioned Completion
Certificate and Completion Plan shall be considered for continuance of approval.

C Fire and life Safety Certificate from Fire Department of the concerned State is to be taken before
submitting the application at AICTE.

d. Additional Course(s)/Programme(s), in future can be allowed subject to the availability of Built-
up areas as per FSI (FAR). However, if the additional construction is to be undertaken in the
existing Building, then Structural Stability Certificate and Certificate of Safe Foundation to be
provided by a Structural Engineer having a Master's Degree with specialization in Structural

Engineering.

e. Competent Authority has to certify that the place is located in Mega and Metro/ Urban/ Rural
areas.

f. The Land area required in the Mega and Metro Cities shall be calculated on the basis of the

requirements as per AICTE norms for carpet area and the Municipal Corporation Bye-Laws.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 124 |
--- Page 160 ---
However, the total Built-up area is to be calculated for the entire duration of the Course with
mandatory prior sanctions and approvals from Competent Authority for the entire proposal.

#The Land area required in Urban/ Rural shall be in a maximum of TWO plots. The Academic,
Instructional, Administrative and Amenities area shall be in one plot not less than 1.5 Acre.
The aerial distance between the plots shall not exceed 2 km. The remaining Land shall only
be utilized for sporting Infrastructure/ Hostel/ Staff accommodation and related educational
activities of the Institution.

Considering the hilly nature of Land in North Eastern States and the hilly regions of States such
as Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh’s UT or any area in any
State declared as hilly by the concerned Government, Land shall be made available in 3 pieces
which are not away from each other by more than 2 km.

g) The total land required shall be the highest amongst the programs/levels being offered by the
Institute. However, institute shall have sufficient built up area to cover all the requirements of
ALL the programs/levels conducted as per the provisions of Approval Process Handbook.

However, the institute shall provide ample space for play-ground (owned or hired) facilities
for indoor and outdoor sports for the students either in the Campus or through arrangements
with other adjacent Institutions, Corporation grounds, private facilities, etc.

NOTE:

a. Starting other educational Course(s)/ Institutions (Technical/Non-Technical) in the surplus
Land/Built-up area arising out of the prevailing/ reduced norms of Land requirement is
permissible. Further such surplus Land shall be used as per the Land use Certificate given to
the Trust/ Society/Company by the concerned authority, subject to such Course(s)/ Institution
sharing their own facilities to conduct such Programmes without sharing the essential facilities,
such as Class Room, Laboratory etc. with the already approved Technical Institution. However,
Common Amenities such as Administrative infrastructure, Canteen, Auditorium, Playground,
Parking, etc. may be shared, provided it caters to all the students of all the Programmes.

b. For an Institution established prior to 1994, the Land requirement should be fulfilled as per
the norms existed thereon for the Programme(s)/ Course(s)/ Divisions applied. In case of any
deviation from those norms, the Institution has to adhere to the existing norms at the time of
seeking Extension of Approval.

c For an Institution established after 1994, the Land requirement should be fulfilled as per AICTE
norms existing at the time of establishment of the Institution for the Programme(s)/ Course(s)/
Divisions applied thereon. In case of any deviation from those norms, the Institution has to
adhere to the existing norms at the time of seeking Extension of Approval.

d. If the Institution (c or d) had been given approval for more Programme(s)/ Course(s)/ Divisions
later, the Land requirements as per the corresponding AICTE norms should be fulfilled.
Annexure 12 of the Approval Process Handbook gives Land Requirements as per AICTE norms
during the previousyears.

e. For Change of Site/ Location or to start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions,
mortgage of land is acceptable.

4.2. Minimum Built-up Area Requirements

a. The Institution area is divided into, Instructional area (INA, carpet area in m2), Administrative
area (ADA, carpet area in m2), Amenities area (AMA, carpet area in m2).

b. Access and Circulation Area (ACA) is around 25% of Built-up Area.

C Total Built-up area in m2 is equal to (INA+ADA+AMA) + (ACA).

d. In case of allied branches in Engineering and Technology, a maximum of 30% of Laboratories
may be shared.

e. For Post Graduate Programmes, Administrative area of Under Graduate Programmes may be
shared.

f. Institutions shall have the Barrier free environment and Sports facilities as specified in the

Chapter VII of the Approval Process Handbook.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 161 ---
4.2.1 Instructional Area (Carpet Area) in Sq. m

A. Engineering and Technology (Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Degree/ Integrated/Dual
Degree) Institutions

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in Sq.m per Room
Class Rooms Total Number of Divisions x 0.75 66/ 33*
Tutorial Roomst 25% of total Class Room 33
Laboratory for First Year 4 (which includes 2 Laboratories 66
for Basic sciences)

Laboratory other than First Year 2 per Course per Year 66
Laboratory for Post Graduate Courses 1 per Course 66

1 Research Laboratory 66
Workshop# 1 200
Additional Laboratory/ Workshop 1 200
for"X” Category Courses
Drawing Hall# 1 132
Computer Centre# 1 150
Seminar Hall 1 132
Library++ 1 400
Language Laboratoryt 1 33

For Courses having more than 3 Divisions, additional Laboratories equivalent to the required number on pro
rata basis for the said Courses shall be created.

* Applicable for Post Graduate Course only.

+ Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software. Additional
Laboratory required, if number of Divisions >5.

++ Additional Library area of 50 m2 per 60 Students beyond 420 “Approved Intake”.

“X" Category Courses such as Mechanical, Production, Civil, Electrical, Chemical, Textile, Marine, Aeronautical
and Allied Courses shall require an Additional Laboratory/ Workshop.

# Drawing Halls, Computer Centres and Workshops to be created as given below:

Approved Intake Computer Centre Workshop Drawing Hall
Up to 600 1 1 1
601-1200 2 2 2

Infrastructure Requirement shall be calculated on pro rata basis for “Approved Intake” greater than 1200

Additional Laboratories to be created (if required) as per Curriculum of the concerned affiliating University.

Under Graduate Laboratories, if shared with Post Graduate Courses shall be upgraded to meet requirements of
Post Graduate Curriculum.

The Institution shall have one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection,
etc.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart Board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation/ Fab Laboratory.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 162 ---
B. Engineering and Technology (Diploma/ Post Diploma) Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room
Class Rooms No. of Divisions x 0.75 66
Tutorial Roomst+ 25% of total Class Room 33
Laboratory for First Year 4 (which includes 2 Laboratories for 66
Basic sciences)

Laboratory other than First Year 2 per Course per Year 66
Workshop#$ 1 200
Additional Laboratory/

Workshop for“X” Category 1 150
Courses

Drawing Hall#$ 1 132
Computer Centre# 1 150
Seminar Hall 1 132
Libraryt+ 1 300
Language Laboratoryt 1 33

For Courses having more than 3 Divisions, additional Laboratories equivalent to the required number on pro
rata basis for the said Courses shall be created.

+Language Laboratory shall havea minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software. Additional Laboratory
required, if number of Divisions >5.

++ Additional Library area of 50 m2 per 60 Students beyond 420 “Approved Intake”.

“X" Category Courses such as Mechanical, Production, Civil, Electrical, Chemical, Textile,
Marine, Aeronautical and Allied Courses shall require an Additional Laboratory/Workshop.
$ Not applicable for DMLT.

# Drawing Halls, Computer Centres and Workshops to be created as given below:

Approved Intake Computer Centre Workshop Drawing Hall
Up to 600 1 1 1
601-1200 2 2 2

Infrastructure Requirement shall be calculated on pro rata basis for “Approved Intake”greater than 1200.

Diploma Laboratories, if shared with the Under Graduate Degree Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of the Under Graduate Curriculum.

Additional Laboratories to be created (if required) as per Curriculum of the concerned University/ Board.

The Institution shall have one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection,
etc.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (theory and Practical)

Institutions shall have Idea Implementation Centre/ Tinkering Laboratory/ Innovation Centre.

Note: There are many nomenclatures common to Engineering Diploma and Applied Arts/ Crafts Diploma.
Hence in all such multidisciplinary type of programs, actual requirements shall be evaluated by respective
Boards.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 163 ---
Cc. Planning (Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Degree/ Integrated Degree) Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room
Class Rooms No. of Divisions x 0.75 60/30"
Resource Centre 1 80
Computer Laboratory (for First Year) 1 60
Studio (other than First Year) 1 per Course per Year 120
Post Graduate Studio 2 60
Model making and Carpentry Workshop 1 120
Art Court 1 100
Multi-Purpose Hall 1 150
Research Laboratory+ 1 60
Computer Centre 1 75
Seminar Hall 1 per Under Graduate 1
Institution 32
1 per Diploma Institution 132
Library 1 150
Language Laboratory 1 30

** Applicable for Post Graduate Course only.

+ Only for Institutions offering Post Graduate Courses.

For Post Graduate Courses, Seminar Hall of respective Under Graduate Degree Course may be shared.
For Courses having more than 2 Divisions, ONE Additional Studio for each Division need to be created.

Under Graduate Laboratories, if shared with Post Graduate Courses shall be upgraded to meet requirements
of Post Graduate Curriculum.

Diploma Laboratories, if shared with the Under Graduate Degree Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of the Under Graduate Curriculum.

Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software.

The Institutions shall have one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet
Connection, etc.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation/ Fab Laboratory.

D. Applied Arts and Crafts (Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree)

Institution
Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room
Class Rooms 1 Room per Division per Year 66/33"
Tutorial Roomst 25% of total Class Room 33
Workshop/ Studio 1 per Course per Year 66
Common Workshop/ Studio 1 90
Workshop/Studio (Post Graduate 1 per specialization 66
ourses)
Studio/Display Room 1 132
Craft Centre 1 66
Computer Centre 1 75
Theatre/ Seminar Hall 1 100
Library 1 150
Language Laboratory 1 33

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 164 ---
+ No Tutorial Rooms Required for Post Graduate Programme.

** Applicable for Post Graduate Course only.

For Post Graduate Courses, Seminar Hall of respective Under Graduate Degree Course may be shared.
For Courses having more than 2 Divisions, one Additional Studio for each Division need to be created.

Under Graduate Laboratories, if shared with Post Graduate Courses shall be upgraded to meet requirements of
Post Graduate Curriculum.

Diploma Laboratories, if shared with the Under Graduate Degree Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of the Under Graduate Curriculum.

Research Laboratory is to be provided with an area of 66 m2 for each Institution offering Post Graduate Courses.
Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software.

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)
Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation Laboratory.

E. Design (Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Degree) Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room

Class Rooms / Studio 1 per Division per Year 100/66*

Tutorial Rooms** 1 per Year 33

Laboratory/ Workshop 1 per Division per Year 66
Photography Laboratory 1 66

Computer Laboratory 1 75

Seminar Hall 1 100

Library 1 150
Language/Audio Visual

Laboratory 1 33

*In case of PG Courses ** Only for UG Courses
For Post Graduate Courses, Seminar Hall of respective Under Graduate Degree Course may be shared.

Under Graduate Laboratories/ Workshops can be shared with Post Graduate Courses if the specialization of the
courses are same by upgrading them to meet the requirements of Post Graduate Curriculum.

The Institution shall have one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection,
etc.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)
Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software.

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart Board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation/ Fab Laboratory.

F. Hotel Management and Catering Technology (Diploma/Under Graduate/Post Graduate Degree/
Integrated Degree) Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room

Class Rooms No. of Divisions x 0.75 66/33**
Tutorial Roomst+ 25% of total Class Room 33
Laboratory (GuestRoom/House Keeping/

Front Office/ Kitchen)for First Year 3 66

Laboratory (Guest Room/ House Keeping/
Front Office/ Kitchen)other than First Year 2 per Course per Year 66

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 165 ---
Laboratory/ Guest Room for PostGraduate 1 en

Programme per Specialization 66
Kitchen with Dining Hall 1 132
Restaurant 2 66
Computer Centre 1 75
Seminar Hall 1 132
Library 1 150
Language Laboratory 1 33

+For Post Graduate Course, Tutorial Rooms not required.

** Applicable for Post Graduate Course only.

For Post Graduate Courses, Seminar Hall of respective Under Graduate Degree Course may be shared.

For Courses having more than 2 Divisions, ONE Additional Laboratory for each Division need to be created.

Under Graduate Laboratories, if shared with Post Graduate Courses shall be upgraded to meet requirements of
Post Graduate Curriculum.

Diploma Laboratories, if shared with the Under Graduate Degree Courses shall be upgraded to meet
requirements of the Under Graduate Curriculum.

Language Laboratory shall have a minimum of 20 Computers with appropriate Software.
Research Laboratory shall be provided with an area of 66 m2 for each Institution offering Post Graduate Courses.

The Institution shall have one Smart Class Room/ Course with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection,
etc.

Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre.

G. MCA/ Integrated MCA Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room
Class Rooms 1 per Division per Year 66
Tutorial Rooms 25% of total Class Room 33
Computer Laboratory 1 66
Computer Centre 1 150
Seminar Hall 1 132
Library 1 100

If the Institution has more than 2 Divisions, one Additional Laboratory for each Division need to be created.
Each Class Room shall be equipped with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection, etc.
Institutions shall have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such LCD projector, Smart Board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation Laboratory.

H. Management(PGDM/MBA/ Integrated Degree) Institution

Particulars Number of Rooms required Carpet Area in m2 per Room
Class Rooms 1 per Division per Year 66
Tutorial Rooms 25% of total Class Room 33
Computer Centre 1 150
Seminar Hall 1 132
Library 1 100

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 166 ---
Each Class Room shall be equipped with LCD projector, Smart Board, Internet Connection, etc. Institutions shall
have facilities for conducting online classes (Theory and Practical)

Seminar Hall shall have proper furnishing and equipment such as LCD projector, Smart Board, PA system and
Executive Chairs.

Institutions shall have MOOCs Facility Centre and Innovation Laboratory.

4.2.2 Administrative Area (Carpet Area) in m?

Particulars

Director

Board Room
Cabin for Head
of Department
and
Department
Faculty Rooms
Central Stores
Maintenance
Security
Housekeeping
Pantry for Staff
Examinations
Control Office
Placement

Carpet Area in m2 per 10/10]10]1

Room 3009

Number of Rooms - First Year

required for new Technical 1 1 1 Student 1/1/4414 1 1 -

Institution intake/15

Total Number of Rooms 1/Department | One per
Faculty (as

1 1 1 per norms) Ty.) }1}1 1 1

in the
Institution

$Technical Institution having more than one Programme
* Technical Institution having one Programme

4.2.3 Amenities Area (Carpet Area) in m?

Particulars

ov
4
-
J
ov
o£
Ee
<=
a
£
<x

Toilets (Ladies
& Gents)

Girls Common
Reprography
First Aid cum
Sick Room
Principal's

quarter
Guest House

Sports Club/
Gymnasium

~
£
s
=
9
SS
3
s
<x

Boys Common
Cafeteria
Stationery
Store and
Boys Hostel
Girls Hostel

Carpet Area in m2 per Room
for the Technical Campus
having more than one
Programme

Carpet Area in m2 per Room

for Technical Campus 1505 75 75 | 150 10 10 | 150 | 30) 100 | 250
having one Programme

350* | 100 | 100 | 150 10 10 | 150 | 30} 200 | 400

Adequate
Adequate

Number of Rooms required
for the new Technical
Institution

Total Number of Rooms

Adequate | Adequate

Desirable
Desirable
Desirable
Desirable
Desirable

Desirable

* Total area for the Technical Institution having more than one Programme
$ Total area for the Technical Institution having one Programme

4.2.4 Circulation Area in m2

Access and Circulation area (ACA) of 25% of sum of Instructional, Administrative and Amenities area is
desired covering common walkways, staircases and entrance lobby.

*y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 131 | AICTE
--- Page 167 ---
APPENDIX-5

Norms for Books, Library facilities, Computer, Software,
Internet, Printers and Laboratory Equipment of the
Technical Institutions

5.1 Computers, Software, Internet and Printers

Programme Number Legal Legal LAN and Mail Printers
of PCs/ System Application Internet Serverand including
Laptopto Software Software** Client Color Printer
student @ (% of total
ratio number of
(Minimum PCs/Laptops)
20 PCs)
Engineering |Diploma 1:6
and 1:
Technology one ae 6 03 20 All Desirable 5%
Post Graduate 1:4
Planning Under 1:6
Graduate 01 10 All Desirable 5%*
Post Graduate 1:4
Applied Arts |Diploma 1:6
and Crafts 7.
Under 6 01 10 All Desirable 5%
Graduate
Post Graduate 1:4
Design Under 1:6
Graduate 01 10 All Desirable 5%
Post Graduate 1:4
Hotel Diploma 1:6
Management | Under 1:6 01 10 All Desirable 5%
and Catering | Graduate
Technology
MCA Post Graduate 1:4 03 20 All Desirable 5%
Management | Post Graduate 1:6 01 10 All Desirable 5%

*At least one printer to be A1 Size Color Printer/ Plotter
** Includes Plagiarism checking Software Internet speed required for the Institution

Approved Intake Internet Band width (1:1)*

up to 300 100 Mbps
301 - 600 300 Mbps
601 - 900 500 Mbps
>900 1Gbps

*In case of Non-Availability of Bandwidth in a Single Connection, Multiple connections shall be ensured to
fulfil the specified Norms.At least 8 Mbps Wi-Fi connectivity and hotspots shall be made available where ever
required(minimum 5 Hotspots) Arrangement to view NPTEL/ SWAYAM & SWAYAM PRABHA etc. shall be made
available.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 132 |
--- Page 168 ---
Utilization of Open Source Software shall be encouraged.
Secured Wi-Fi facility with reliable hardware is highly recommended
Utilization of indigenized Video conferencing facility is recommended

Library, Administrative Offices and Faculty members shall be provided with exclusive computing
facilities along with LAN and Internet. This shall be considered as over and above the requirement

Central Photo copying facility for students is preferred
PC shall also include Laptop in the inventory of the Institution

Every Department shall have separate Computer Laboratory with at least 20 Computers anda centralized

Effective utilization of ICT / Research / Other academic related facilities extended by agencies /
organizations through MoU with AICTE is highly recommended (https://www.aicte-india.org/

The Laboratories shall have Equipment as appropriate for experiments as stated/suitable for the
requirements of the affiliating University/ Board’s Curriculum. It is desired that the number of

experimental set-up be so arranged that maximum four students shall work on one set.

a.
b.
c
d.
meant for PCs to students ratio
e. @Adequate number of software licenses is required
f.
g.
h.
Computer Laboratory with at least 100 Computers.
i.
education/collaborations).
5.2 Laboratory Equipment and Experiments
5.3 Books and Library Facilities

Programme

Total

Number

of

Divisions

Titles

Volumes

Number

Reading
Room
Seating

% of Total
Students

Multimedia
PCs for Digital
Library/ internet
Surfing located in

the reading room

% of Total
Students

Engineering and B Half the number | Half the number

Technology/ Applied as required for | as required for

Arts and Crafts/ Hotel Under Graduate | Under Graduate | 15 % (Max. Minimum 10
Management and Degree Course | Degree Course 150)

Catering Technology in the same in the same

(Diploma) Programme Programme

Engineering and B 100# 500xB#

Technology (Under 50 per* Course | 250 per*Course

Graduate)

Planning (Under B 100# 400xBH

Graduate) 50* 400xB* 15 % (Max.

Applied Arts and Crafts/ B 100# 500xB# 150)

Design (Under Graduate) 50° 500xB*

Hotel Management and B 100# 500xB#

Catering Technology 50° 500xB* a
(Under Graduate) Minimum 10
Engineering and B 50# 200#

Technology/Planning/

Applied Arts and 5 F $

Crafts/ Design/Hotel As» Required 100

Management and 25 % (Max.

Catering Technology (Post 100)

Graduate)

MCA/PGDM/ MBA (Post B 100# 500xB#

Graduate) 50* 500xB*

B - Number of Divisions at First year

| 13

AICTE

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 169 ---
1# | Book Titles and Volumes required at the time of starting a new Technical Institution equally distributed
per subject.

2* | Annual Increment equally distributed per subject.

3. | Total number of Titles and Volumes shall be increased in continuation till 10 years from the starting

of the course(s), which shall be the minimum stock of Books. Institutions shall have to add an annual
increment of Books based on the changes in Curriculum and Syllabus from time to time by the affiliating
University/Board.

NOTE: After 10 years as per the Affiliating Body Curriculum and Syllabus, the Older Edition Books shall be
replaced with latest edition by 5% of the total minimum Books required for that Programme.

Component for additional Division/ Course.

Books shall also include subjects of Science, Humanities, Management and Social Science as per the
requirements of the Curriculum and Syllabus.

Digital Library facility with multimedia facility is essential.

Reprographic facility in the Library is essential.

Document scanning facility in the Library is essential.

oO }/~oOIN)O

Library Books/ non Books processing as per the standard classification and cataloguing system is
essential.

Facilities to access the Online Courses is essential.

Library automation software including Bar coding is desirable.

Upto 66% of the total number of Titles and Volumes may be in the form of e-books with intranet access
is mandatory in case of Post Graduate Level Programme(s) and shall be desirable in case of UG/ Diploma
Programme(s). Member in NDL/ Indian National Digital Library in Engineering Sciences and Technology
(INDEST) or any other National Consortium is permissible for e-books.

13

The Institution shall be a member of National Digital Library. Aggregators shall also be used.

14

NDL membership for faculty and students is highly desirable.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 134 |
--- Page 170 ---
APPENDIX-6

Norms for Essential and Desirable Requirements of the
Technical Institutions

6.1 Essential Requirements for Technical Institution
1 | Establishment of Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism as specified in the Essential
ApprovalProcess Handbook*
2 |Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education | Essential
notified Regulation for prevention and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical
Institutions vide No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated 01.07.2009) *
3 |Establishment of Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment Essential
of OMBUDSMAN by the University.(As per All India Council for Technical Education
(Redressal of Grievance of Students) Regulation, 2019 vide F. No.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/
Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019) * All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal
of Grievance of Faculty/Staff Member) Regulations, 2021 vide F.No.1- 103/ AICTE/PGRC/
Regulation/2021dated 25.03.2021
4 |Establishment of Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) (As per Section 4 All India Council Essential
for Technical Education (Gender Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual
Harassment of Women Employees and Students and Redressal of Grievances in Technical
Institutions) Regulations, 2016 vide No. F.AICTE/WH/2016/01dated 10th June, 2016 *
5 |Establishment of Committee for SC/ ST (As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Essential
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 of 1989, dated 11.09.1989) *
6 |Internal Quality Assurance Cell* Essential
7 | Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons (as per Chapter VII of the Essential
Approval Process Handbook)
8 |Fire and Safety Certificate Essential
9 |Internship policy essential requirment*** Essential
10 | Facilitate teachers for undergoing Pedagogical training through NITTT Guidelines Essential
11 |Implementation of student Induction Programme*** Essential
12 | At least 5 MoUs with Industries Essential
13 |Implementation of examination reforms Essential
14 | Compliance of the National Academic Depository (NAD) as per MoE directives, (Applicable | Essential
for Standalone Institutions and Universities)
15 | Safety and Security measures in the Campus (as per Chapter VII of the Approval Process Essential
Handbook) (Check No. 8 also)
16 | Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 at the Institution Essential
17 | Digital payment for all financial transactions as per MoE directives Essential
18 | Display of information submitted to AICTE (including the accreditation status and Board Essential
of Governors) along with mandatory disclosures in the prime location of the Web site(as a
quick link) of the Institution
19 | Language Laboratory (for institutions having Diploma and Degree Programs) Essential
20 | Portable Water supply and outlets for drinking water at strategic locations Essential
21 | Electrical Grid Power Supply Connection Essential
22 | Backup Electric Supply Essential
23 | Sports facilities Essential
25 |Waste Management and environment improvement measures to ensure a sustainable Essential
Green Campus
26 | Sewage Disposal System Essential

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 171 ---
27 | Display board within the premises as well as on the Web site of the Institution Essential
Indicating the feedback facility of students and Faculty available in AICTE Web-Portal

28 | First aid, Medical and Counselling Facilities Essential
29 | Students Safety Insurance Essential
30 | Group Accident Policy to be provided for the employees Essential
31 | Facility to watch MOOCs through SWAYAM & SWAYAM PRABHA Essential
32 | Road suitable for use by Motor vehicle- Motorized Road Essential
33 |Institution-Industry Cell Essential
34 | Applied for membership of National Digital Library Essential

35 | Copies of AICTE approvals (LoA and EoA of subsequent years) obtained since inception of | Essential
the Institution till date shall be placed on the Web site of the Institution and Information
about available Courses at the Entrance of the Institution

36 | Appointment of Student Counsellor Essential
37 | Vehicle Parking Essential
38 | General Notice Board and Departmental Notice Boards Essential
39 | Provision / Facilities to conduct online meetings, Webinars, classes and examinations Essential

AO | Display of Course(s) and“Approved Intake’ in the Institution at the entrance of the Institution.| Essential

41 |Implementation of Skill India Mission Essential
42 | Institute Innovation Council (IIC) Essential
43 |Implementation of PARAKH Essential

* Appointment of Committees/ IQAC/ Grievance Mechanism should be made before commencement of the
session, however, an Affidavit 2 to that effect need to be submitted by the new Technical Institution at the
time of inspection by Expert Visit Committee

** An Affidavit to be uploaded on the Portal for the compliance of Implementation of Internship Policy of AICTE.

*** An Undertaking to be uploaded on the Portal that the Institution shall possess an UHV Induction Programme
trained Faculty for every 20 newly joined students before AY 2022-23.

**** An Undertaking to be uploaded on the Portal that the Internal Assessment & Laboratory Work shall be
carried out following AICTE Exam Reforms and all the existing Faculty shall be trained for the same.

Note: The above mentioned documents need to be uploaded before downloading the EoA. The Council shall
verify their implementation at any point of time.

6.2. Desirable Requirements of a Technical Institution

1 {Implementation of the schemes announced by Government of India Desirable

2 | Offering of Skill development Courses approved by the Council Desirable

3 | Fabrication facility Laboratory (FABLAB)/ AICTE-IDEA LAB/Tinkering Laboratory/ Innovation | Desirable
Laboratory

4 | Availability of at least ONE Smart Class Room per Department Desirable

5 |Installation of grid connected solar rooftops/ Power Systems Desirable

6 | Public announcement system at strategic locations for general announcements/ paging and _ | Desirable
announcements in emergency

7 |Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Software for Student-Institution-Parent Interaction Desirable

8 | Efforts to encourage Final Year students to appearin various competitive Examinations. Desirable

9 | Efforts to encourage students to participate in National/International competition like SIH, etc. | Desirable

10 | Efforts to encourage students to take-up internship and project work in Indian Knowledge Desirable
System related Areas/Topics/Disaster Management

11 | Transport Desirable
12 | Banking Facility/ Automated Teller Machine Desirable
13|LCD (or similar) projectors in Class Rooms Desirable

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 136 |
--- Page 172 ---
14 | Auditorium Desirable
15 | Staff Quarters Desirable
16 | Course(s) taken through duly recognized MOOCs shall be used as Supplementary Course(s) | Desirable

17 | General Insurance provided for assets against fire, burglary and other calamities Desirable
18 | Intellectual Property Right Cell Desirable
19 |Implementation of Unnat Bharat Abhiyan/ Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) Desirable
20 | Implementation of Start-up Policy Desirable
21 | Social Media Cell Desirable
22 | Participation in the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) Desirable
23 | Participation in the National Innovation Ranking (ARIIA) Desirable
24 | Plastic Free Campus Desirable
25 | Measures for Cybersecurity Desirable
26 | Availability of quality sanitary napkins through sanitary napkin vending machinesand Desirable

ensuring safe and environmental friendly disposal of used sanitary napkin through sanitary
napkin incinerator

27 | Rainwater Harvesting Desirable
28 | Happiness Metrics Scheme Desirable

6.3 Structure of the Committees
6.3.1 Structure of Anti Ragging Committee

Every Institution/ University including Institution Deemed to be University imparting Technical
Education shall constitute a Committee to be known as the Anti-Ragging Committee to be
nominated and headed by the Head of the Institution, and consisting of representatives of Civil
and Police Administration, Local Media, Non-Government Organizations involved in youth
activities, representatives of Faculty members, representatives of parents, representatives of
students belonging to the freshers’ category as well as senior students, non-teaching staff and
shall have a diverse mix of membership in term of Level as well as gender.

6.3.2 Grievance Redressal Mechanism

In order to provide opportunities for redressal of certain grievances of students already enrolled
in any institution, as well as for those seeking admission to such institutions, AICTE has notified
All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students) Regulations,
2019 vide F. No. 1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019 for establishment of
grievance redressal mechanism for all AICTE approved Technical Institutions. Non-compliance
of the above Regulations shall call for punitive action.

Student Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC)

A complaint from an aggrieved student relating to the institution shall be addressed to
the Chairperson, Student Grievance Redressal Committee (SGRC).

Every AICTE approved institution shall constitute Student Grievance Redressal Committee
(SGRC) with the following composition, namely:

a. Principal of the College- Chairperson;

b. Three senior members of the teaching faculty to be nominated by the Principal as Members
and out of three one member shall be female and other from SC/ST/OBC category;

c. Arepresentative from among students of the College to be nominated by the Principal
based on academic merit/excellence in sports/performance in co-curricular activities-
Special Invitee.

The term of the members and the special invitee shall be of two years.

The quorum for the meeting including the Chairperson, but excluding the special invitee,
shall be three.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 173 ---
In considering the grievances before it, the SGRC shall follow principles of natural justice.

The SGRC shall send its report with recommendations, if any, to the concerned institution
and a copy thereof to the aggrieved student, within a period of 15 days from the date of
receipt of the complaint.

Any student aggrieved by the decision of the Student Grievance Redressal Committee
may prefer an appeal to the Ombudsperson, within a period of fifteen days from the date
of receipt of such decision.

Appointment, Tenure, Removal and Conditions of Services of Ombudsperson:

Each affiliating University, Technical University, Private University, Deemed to be
University shall appoint Ombudsperson for redressal of grievances of students under the
UGC (Redress of Grievances of Students) Regulations, 2019.

There shall be one or more part-time functionaries designated as Ombudsperson to hear,
and decide on, appeals preferred against the decisions of the SGRCs.

For institutions which are offering diploma level course(s) and are affiliated to Board of
Technical Education (BTE), the concerned Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) shall
appoint an Ombudsperson for redressal of grievances of students.

For Institution which are not affiliated to any University and offering Diploma, Post
Diploma, Post Graduate Certificate, Post Graduate Diploma Course(s) in Management,
Computer Applications & Travel and Tourism, the Council shall appoint an Ombudsperson
for redressal of grievances of students.

The Ombudsperson shall be a Retired District Judge or a retired Vice Chancellor or
Professor (who has worked as Dean/HOD and 10 years’ experience as Professor at State/
Central Universities/Institution of eminence).

The Ombudsperson shall not, at the time of appointment, during one year before
appointment, or in the course of his tenure as Ombudsperson, be in a conflict of interest
with the Institution where his/her personal relationship, professional affiliation or financial
interest may compromise or reasonably appear to compromise, the independence of
judgement toward the Institution.

The Ombudsperson shall be appointed for a period of three years or until he or she attains
the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier, from the date of assuming office, and shall be
eligible for reappointment for another one term for the same State or region, as the case
may be.

For conducting the hearings, the Ombudsperson shall be paid a sitting fee, per diem,
in accordance with the norms fixed by the Council, and shall, in addition, be eligible for
eimbursement of the expenditure incurred on conveyance.

The State Government, in the case of an Ombudsperson of a State, and the Council (for
Council appointed Ombudsperson), may remove the Ombudsperson from office, on
charges of proven misconduct or misbehaviour as defined under these Regulations.

No order of removal of Ombudsperson shall be made except after an inquiry made in this
regard by a person not below the rank of judge of the High Court in which a reasonable
opportunity of being heard is given to the Ombudsperson.

Functions of Ombudsperson:

The Ombudsperson shall hear appeals from an aggrieved student(s), only after the
student has availed all other remedies provided under these Regulations.

While issues of malpractices in the conduct of examination or in the process of evaluation
may be referred to the Ombudsperson, no appeal or application for revaluation or re-
totalling of answer sheets from an examination, shall be entertained by the Ombudsperson
unless specific irregularity materially affecting the outcome of specific instance of
discrimination is indicated.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 174 ---
The Ombudsperson may avail assistance of any person, as amicus curiae, for hearing
complaints of alleged discrimination.

The Ombudsperson shall make all efforts to resolve the grievances within a period of 30
days of receiving the appeal from the aggrieved student(s).

Procedure for Redressal of Grievances by Ombudspersons and Student Grievance
Redressal Committees:

Each institution shall, within a period of three months from the date of issue of this
notification, have an online portal where any aggrieved student may submit an application
seeking redressal of grievance.

On receipt of an online complaint, the institution shall refer the complaint to the
appropriate Student Grievance Redressal Committee, along with its comments within 15
days of receipt of complaint on the online portal.

The Student Grievance Redressal Committee, as the case may be, shall fix a date for
hearing the complaint which shall be communicated to the institution and the aggrieved
student.

An aggrieved person may appear either in person or authorize a representative to present
his/her case.

Grievances not resolved by the Student Grievance Redressal Committee shall be referred
to the Ombudsperson, within the time period provided in these Regulations.

Institutions shall extend co-operation to the Ombudsperson or the Student Grievance
Redressal Committee, in early redressal of grievances; and failure to do so may be reported
by the Ombudsperson to the Council, which shall take action in accordance with the
provisions of these Regulations.

The Ombudsperson shall, after giving reasonable opportunities of being heard to both
parties, on the conclusion of proceedings, pass such order, with reasons therefore as may
be deemed fit to redress the grievance and provide such relief as may be appropriate to
the aggrieved student.

The institution, as well as the aggrieved student, shall be provided with copies of the
order under the signature of the Ombudsperson, and the institution shall place it for
general information on its website.

The institution shall comply with the recommendations of the Ombudsperson; and the
Ombudsperson shall report to the Council any failure on the part of the institution to
comply with the recommendations.

The Ombudsperson may recommend appropriate action against the complainant, where
a complaint is found to be false or frivolous.

Information Regarding Ombudspersons and Student Grievance Redressal
Committees:

An institution shall furnish, prominently, on its website and in its prospectus, all relevant
information in respect of the Students Grievance Redressal Committee(s) coming in its
purview, and the Ombudsperson for the purpose of appeals.

Consequences of Non-Compliance:

The Council shall in respect of any Technical institution, which wilfully contravenes or
repeatedly fails to comply with the recommendation of the Ombudsperson or the Student
Grievance Redressal Committee, as the case may be, proceed to take one or more of the
following actions, namely:

withdrawal of approval granted to the Technical Institution;

withdrawal of declaration of fitness or entitlement to receive grants or financial assistance
from the Council;

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 175 ---
6.3.3

6.3.4

withholding any grant allocated to the Technical Institution;

declaring the institution ineligible for consideration for any assistance under any of the
general or special assistance programs of the Council;

informing the general public, including potential candidates for admission, through a
notice displayed prominently in suitable media and posted on the website of Council,
declaring that the institution does not possess the minimum standards for redressal of
grievances;

recommend to the affiliating University for withdrawal of affiliation, in case of a University
affiliated institution or DTE affiliated institution;

Such other action as may be deemed necessary and appropriate against an institution for
non-compliance.

Provided that no action shall be taken by the Council under these Regulations, unless the
institution has been given an opportunity to explain its position and an opportunity of
being heard has been provided to it.

Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging:
Implementation of the above shall be in line with norms prescribed in Appendix 12
Grievance Redressal Cell (GRC) for Faculty/Staff:

Implementation of the above shall be in line with norms prescribed in Appendix 15

Committee for SC/ST

Committee shall consist of five members, out of which at least 2 members shall be SC/ST and
one member shall be a woman.

Internal Complaint Committee (ICC)

Responsibilities of the Technical Institution as per Gender Sensitization, Prevention and
Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees and Students and Redressal of
Grievances in Technical Institutions (All India Council for Technical Education Regulations,
2016)

Every Technical Institution shall Publicly notify the provisions against sexual harassment and
ensure their wide- dissemination

a.

Include in institution's Web Site, prospectus and display prominently at conspicuous
places or Notice Boards the penalty and consequences of sexual harassment and make
all sections of the institutional community aware of the information on the mechanism
put in place for Redressal of complaints pertaining to sexual harassment, contact details
of members of Internal Complaints Committee, complaints procedure and so on

Organise Training Programmes or as the case may be, workshops for the officers,
functionaries, faculty and students, to sensitize them and ensure knowledge and
awareness of the rights, entitlements and responsibilities enshrined in the Act and under
these regulations

Organise regular orientation or training Programmes for the members of the ICC to deal
with complaints, steer the process of settlement or conciliation, etc., with sensitivity

Act decisively against all gender based violence perpetrated against employees and
students of all sexes recognising that primarily women employees and students and
some male students and students of the third gender are vulnerable to many forms of
sexual harassment and humiliation and exploitation

Every Technical Institution shall constitute an Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) with
an inbuilt mechanism for gender sensitization against sexual harassment. The ICC shall
have the following composition:

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 176 ---
A Presiding Officer who shall be a woman Faculty member employed at a senior Level (not
below a Professor in case of a University, and not below an Associate Professor in case of
an Institution) at the Educational Institution, nominated by the Executive Authority

Two Faculty members and two non-teaching employees, preferably committed to the
cause of women or who have had experience in social work or have legal knowledge,
nominated by the Executive Authority

Three students (comprising of at least one girl student) of Pre-Final/Final year at
Undergraduate/ Diploma Level Institution, as the case may be One member from amongst
Non-government Organisation or Associations committed to the cause of women or a
person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment, nominated by the Executive
Authority

At least one-half of the total members of the ICC shall bewomen.

Persons in senior positions such as Chairman/ Secretary of the Society, Principal/ Director
of the Institution, etc. shall not be the members of the ICCs in order to ensure autonomy
of their functioning

The term of office of the members of the ICC shall be for a period of three years. Institutions
may also employ a system whereby one-third of the members of the ICC may change
every year

All Technical Institutions approved by AICTE shall upload the Annual Report containing
the following details by 30" June of the Calendar Year:

Number of complaints of sexual harassment received in the year

Number of orientation or training Programmes carried out for the members of the ICC to
deal with complaints

Number of complaints disposed of during the year
Number of cases pending for more than 90 days

Number of workshops or awareness Programme carried out for the officers, functionaries,
faculty and students to sensitize them against sexual harassment

Nature of action taken by the Technical Institution against the perpetrator

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 177 ---
APPENDIX-7

Norms for Faculty Requirements and Cadre Ratio of the
Technical Institutions

7.1 Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate Programme

Programme Faculty: Student based Principal/ Head of the Faculty Total
on Approved Intake Director Department
A B C D=A+B+C

Engineering
and Technology/
AppliedArts
and Crafts Design/ 1:25 1 1 per Department | (S/ 25) - 1 S/25
HotelManagement
and Catering
Technology
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake” at all years

7.2 Under Graduate Degree Programme

Programme Faculty: Student based Principal/ Professor Associate Assistant Total
on Approved Intake Director Professor Professor
A+B+C+D

Engineering S S S S
and :20 1 oR ' | DoxR*? | DoxR*° 20
Technology
Planning

1. Ss _ Ss s Ss

16 | ToxR | | TexR*? | Texr*® 16

Applied Arts

1:15 1 S__ $ $ $
and Crafts 15xR | | 15xR*? | T5xR*® 15
Design

1: So _ Ss s Ss

“15 | TsxR | | T5xR%?  TexR*® 75

Hotel
Management 1. So _ Ss Ss S
and Catering 20 1 20xR 1 20xR * 2 20xR * 6 20
Technology
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake’ for all years, R = (1+2+6)=9

However, Institutions Deemed to be Universities/Institutions having Accreditation/Autonomy status shall have
Faculty: Student ratio of 1:15 in Under Graduate Degree Level in Engineering and Technology and maintain a
better Cadre ratio in order to achieve excellence in Technical Education & Research.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 142 |
--- Page 178 ---
7.3 Post Graduate Degree Programme

Programme Faculty: Student Principal/ Professor Associate Assistant Total
based on Director Professor Professor
Approved Intake iN Cc D A+B+C+D
*Engineering and - S S S S
Technology 1:15 T5xR T5xR T5xR 15
Planning 110 - Ss S Ss s
: 10xR TOxR TOxR 10

Applied Arts and Crafts - S S S S

115 T5xR T5xR T5xR 15
Design - iS S S S

15 15xR 15xR 15xR 15
*Hotel Management and - S S S S
Catering Technology 1:12 12xR 12xR 12xR 12
#MCA 1

: S Ss S S

120 Zoxk | | 2oxR** | 20xR*™©| ~20
#MBA/PGDM 1 S S S Ss

1:20 xR | | DoxR*2 | DxR*©} Jo
S - Sum of the number of students as per “Approved Intake” for all years In case of non-availability of
qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.
*R = (14141); #R = (14246

In case of non-availability of qualified Professor, an Associate Professor may be considered.

In Integrated Planning Course, Faculty requirement is 1:16 for the first three years and 1:10 for the next two
years.

Cadre Ratio shall be 1:2:6 (Not applicable to Diploma Level).

However, Institutions Deemed to be Universities/Institutions having Accreditation/Autonomy status shall have
Faculty: Student ratio of 1:15 in Post Graduate Degree Level in MBA/MCA/PGDM and maintain a better Cadre
ratio in order to achieve excellence in Technical Education & Research.

Considering the time required to complete the procedure for recruitment of Faculty, receiving Block grants from
the concerned State Government, etc., all such Institutions shall have to create the necessary Faculty, Infrastructure
and other facilities WITHIN 1 YEAR (AY 2022-23) to fulfil the norms and an Affidavit for the same shall have to be
submitted to AICTE.

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 179 ---
APPENDIX-8
Faculty Cadre and Qualifications

Faculty Cadre and Qualifications shall be as per:

AICTE Regulations on Pay Scales, Service Conditions and Minimum Qualifications for the Appointment of
Teachers and Other Academic Staff such as Library, Physical Education and Training & Placement Personnel
in Technical Institutions and Measures for the maintenance of Standards in Technical Education - (Degree)
Regulation, 2019 and subsequent amendments/ new Regulations issued by AICTE from time to time.

AICTE Regulations on Pay Scales, Service Conditions and Minimum Qualifications for the Appointment of
Teachers and Other Academic Staff such as Library, Physical Education and Training & Placement Personnel
in Technical Institutions and Measures for the maintenance of Standards in Technical Education - (Diploma)
Regulation, 2019 and subsequent amendments/ new Regulations issued by AICTE from time to time.

As per All India Council for Technical Education notification (Redressal of Grievance of Faculty/Staff Member)
Regulations, 2021 vide F.No. 1-103/AICTE/PGRC/Regulation/2021 dated 25.03.2021, all Pay Scales related
Issues of the Faculty shall be suitably addressed by the concerned State / Central Government. Based on the
recommendation of State Government / Central Government, AICTE shall initiate punitive action as per Clause
8.4 of Chapter VIII in APH.

AICTE ‘APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 144 |
--- Page 180 ---
APPENDIX-9
Norms for PGDM/PGCM Courses

9.1
9.2
9.3

9.4

9.5

9.6

9.7

9.8

9.9

9.10

9.11

The duration of the Post Graduate Diploma in Management (PGDM) Course shall be 2 years.
Post Graduate Certificate in Management (PGCM) Course shall be of 1 year duration.

PGDM Programme shall be of duration of 18 Months for working professionals having a minimum of
5 years relevant managerial/supervisory experience.

The Academic calendar for admission of students shall be followed as prescribed by AICTE. The
admission shall be started from 1st March (subject to the grant of EoA for the current Academic Year by
the Council) and end by 30" June every year.

Admission to PGDM Courses shall be made only from the candidates qualified from any one of the six
All India tests, i.e; CAT, XAT, CMAT, ATMA, MAT, GMAT or the common entrance examinations (if any)
conducted by the respective State Governments for all Institutions other than Minority Institutions.

The candidates shall be short listed on the basis of the overall rank computed taking into account of the
following components and their weights:

. Score in the Common Admission test - 35 to 60%

. Score for academic performance in X Std., XII Std., Under Graduate Degree/ Post Graduate
Degree - 5 to 25%

. Group discussion/ interview - 20 to 45%

. Weight age for participation in Sports, Extra-Curricular activities, Academic diversity and

Gender diversity - 5 to 20%

PGDM Institutions shall publish the information regarding the name of the Common Admission
test, from which the candidates are selected for admission, the percentage of scores of the above
components on its website and admission Brochure well before the admission process initiated and
inform the Applicants through specific communications.

The Institution shall clearly display and inform AICTE (through URL under attachment tab in web portal)
and clearly display on the Institution Web site the eligibility criteria, selection procedure and the merit
list of the candidates who have applied for the Programme. The selection of the students shall be strictly
on the basis of merit only.

Institutions shall upload PGCM/ PGDM students’ enrolment data in the prescribed format on AICTE
Web-Portal within one month from the last date as prescribed by AICTE for admission every year. If it is
not uploaded, the Council shall not permit such institutions to apply for approval for the next Academic
Year.

The Institutions shall mandatorily mention the enrolment number allotted to each student by AICTE in
their Diploma Certificate and mark sheets as per the format available in AICTE Portal.

Institutions may devise their own Curriculum for PGCM/PGDM Courses, however it shall be in conformity
with the Model Curriculum developed by AICTE and incorporate significant part ofacademic components
in their Curriculum. To introduce any new Course, the nomenclature and Syllabus of the same shall be
submitted to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE for approval of the concerned Board.

Board of Governors (BoG)/Board of Management (BoM) is to be constituted as per Appendix 18 of the
Approval Process Handbook for Standalone PGDM Institutions. The minutes of the meetings of the
Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) shall be uploaded periodically in the website
of the Institutions.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 181 ---
9.12

9.13

9.14

9.15

9.16

9.17

9.18

9.19

9.20

9.21

9.22

PGDM Institutions shall refund the Fee collected, after deducting an amount of 1000/-(One Thousand
only) as processing Fee and return the Certificates to the students with drawing the admission before
the last date of admission, irrespective of the reasons for withdrawal of admission. The last date for
withdrawal of admission for the purpose of refund of Fee shall be 30thJune of every year.

PGDM Institutions shall publish the Fee being charged in its web site and admission Brochure well
before the admission process is initiated and inform the Applicants through specific communications.

PGDM Institutions shall follow norms and standards and conditions prescribed by the Council from
time to time.

PGDM Institutions should upload both the Transcripts and Certificates of all the students passed out on
National Academic Depositary (NAD) and provide NAD registration details on AICTE portal.

The rules with respect to matters relating to examinations and arbitration shall be decided by the All
India Board of Management, AICTE.

OMBUDSPERSON shall be appointed as per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of
Grievance of Students) Regulation, 2019 vide F. No. 1-101/PGRC/AICTE/ Regulation/2019 dated
07.11.2019.

The academic session shall normally be from 1* July of the Current Calendar Year to 30" June of the next
Calendar Year.

The Standalone Institutions (PGDM) are falling under THREE categories, as Category I, Il and Ill based on
the All India Council for Technical Education (Categorisation of Standalone Institutions (SIs) for Grant of
Graded Autonomy) Regulations, 2019.

Category I/II Institutions shall have to update the data in AICTE Web-Portal on annual basis and comply
the norms and standards as specified by AICTE from time to time. An Affidavit 2 to this effect shall be
submitted annually to AICTE. Student enrolment details shall be uploaded in the Web-Portal within one
month from the last date for admission every year. Also, Institutions should upload both the Transcripts
and Certificates of all the students passed out on National Academic Depositary (NAD) and provide
NAD registration details on AICTE portal.

Ifany complaints are received regarding violation of prescribed norms, AICTE shall inspect the Institution
and punitive action as specified in Chapter VIII of the Approval Process Handbook shall be initiated.

The existing standalone PGDM institutions may run Fellow Program in Management (FPM) based on
their eligibility as specified in Clause 2.17 of Chapter Il.

The Conduct and Admission procedure for such approved FPM program shall be in line with the norms
as specified in Appendix 20.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 146 |
--- Page 182 ---
APPENDIX-10

Subscription of Journals

Programme Total Number Journals Journals Published

of Courses Published in India at Abroad

Engineering and Technology Planning/ Journals /Periodicals / Magazines

Applied Arts and Crafts/ Design/ Hotel Providing Exposure to New

Management and Catering Technology Products/Ideas/Concepts etc.

(Diploma)

Engineering and Technology (Under Graduate) N 6x N#

Planning (Under Graduate) N 6x N# Desirable

Applied Arts and Crafts/ Design (Under N 6xN#

Graduate)

Hotel Management and Catering Technology N 6xN#

(Under Graduate)

Engineering and Technology Planning/

Applied Arts and Crafts/ Design/ Hotel N 6xN#

Management and Catering Technology (Post 6xN#

Graduate)

MBA/ PGDM/ MCA (Post Graduate) N 6xN#

All the Journals in the Library are to be “subscribed” and at least 25% are to be indexed by Scopus/ Web of
Science/ Medline

NOTE: Subscription may NOT necessarily mean Individual Procurements, but can be part of University /State /
Group of Institutes in a“Consortium”.

It is desirable to procure the hard copy of Journals published abroad. However, subscription to Journals
published in India is essential. Subscription to e-journals are recommended.

# As per the Programme(s)/Course(s) offered by the Institution, relevant e-journals from Web of Science or
Scopus shall be subscribed.

The e-Shodh Sindhu is providing support in negotiating the prices of e-resources to AICTE approved Technical
Institutions. The same shall be explored by the Institutions.

Journals shall also include subjects of Science, Humanities, Management and Social Science.

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 183 ---
APPENDIX-11

Format for Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the
Establishment of a New Technical Institution

11.1 Preamble

Detailed Project Report (DPR) is expected to cover the genesis of the proposal with respect to the
background of the Technical Education and Industrial scenario of the State where the proposed
Institution is being located and the credentials of the Consultants, if any, engaged by the Promoters.

a. Introduction
b. Background of the Consultants
c. Technical Education and Industry Scenario

11.2. The Promoting Body

The status of the Promoting Body, its legal standing with respect to registration formalities, nature of
the Body viz., Charitable Trust, Family Trust, Co-operative Society, Public Society etc., its activities since
its inception with specific emphasis on its Social, Charitable, educational activities along with a list of
major activities undertaken to date, its mission and vision shall be described as follows:

a. Introduction to its Genesis including its Registration Status
b. Details of its Promoters including their Background
c Activities of the Promoting Body including a listing of major Educational promotion activities

undertaken by it in the past
d. Mission of the Promoting Body
e. Vision of the Promoting Body
11.3. Objectives and Scope of the Proposed Institution

The goal of the proposed Institution, Scope and Justification of its establishment in the light of the
prevailing Technical Education and Industrial scenario in the State, availability of students for admission,
particularly the number of students passing the qualifying examination viz., +2 Science with First Class
and the number of seats already available in the particular Course (B.E./B.HMCT./ MBA/ MCA/ Diploma,

etc.) in the State, and the genesis of the proposal with respect to the technical manpower requirement
of the State, if available shall be described as follows:

a. Objectives of the Institution

b. General and Technical Education Scenario of the State

c. Status at Entry Level

d. Status of Technical Level manpower

e. Industrial Scenario of the State

f. Scope of the Institution vis-a-vis the Industrial Scenario and Educational Facilities already

available in the State.
11.4 Academic Programmes

The basic Academic Philosophy of the Institution and to list the identified Programmes, targets, and
various facilities shall be described as follows:

a. Basic Academic Philosophy of the Institution
b. Types of Programmes
c Identified Programmes

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 148 |
--- Page 184 ---
11.5

11.8

2

Phase-wise Introduction of Programmes and Intake

e. Target Date for Start of Academic Programmes
f. Central Computing facility

g. Central Library

h. Central Workshop

i. Central Instrumentation Facility

j. Affiliating Body

k. Scholarships

I. Preventive measures of Ragging

m. Welfare measures for Faculty, Staff and students

In case of standalone PGDM Programmes, comprehensive details in respect of admission
procedure, Programme structure, Curriculum outline and contents, evaluation system etc. should
necessarily be submitted. Standalone PGDM Programmes shall be regulated as per Appendix 9
of the Approval Process Handbook.

Salient Features of Academic Programmes

Phase-wise details of the Academic Programmes/ Divisions that the Proposed Institution desires to
setup in consonance with its Academic Philosophy, including the Objectives, Areas of Focus, Detailed
Analysis of Requirements of Faculty, Building Space, Equipment, etc. for each Academic Division shall
be described as follows:

a. Classification of Academic Divisions, i.e. Departments, Centres, Schools, Central Academic
Facilities
b. Details of each Academic Department/ Centre, such as:

+ Academic Objectives

+ — Areas of Focus

+ Academic Programme

+ — Faculty Requirement and Phase-wise Recruitment

+ Requirement of Laboratories, Space and Equipment(cost)

+ Requirement of other Space like Class Rooms, Faculty Rooms, Departmental Office
Quality and Human Resource Development

The Human Resource Developmental aspects of the proposed Institution including, the Policies of the
Management to promote excellence among Faculty and Staff, Strategies to attract and retain bright
Faculty and methodologies towards quality management and fostering of academic excellence shall be
described as follows:

a. Academic Values

b. Recruitment, Strategies for Attracting and Retention of Faculty Personnel for Excellence,
Promotional Avenues, Career Ladder

c Policies for Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff Development

d. Permanent and Contract Services for Teaching, Non-Teaching and other support Personnel

e. Total Quality Management

f. Overall Teaching and Non-Teaching Staff Requirements

Linkages in Technical Education

Elaborate the external linkages envisaged along with the strategies for promotion of R&D, Partnership
with Industry, etc. for the wholesome growth of students as well as for the contribution of the Institutions
to Society at large, as follows:

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 185 ---
a. Introduction

b. Linkages with Industry

c. Linkages with the Community

d. Linkages with other Technical Institutions in the region

e. Linkages with Institutions of excellence such as the IITs and IISc, Bangalore Linkages Abroad
f. Linkages with R&D Laboratories

11.9 Governance, Academic and Administrative Management

The basic Philosophy of Governance and Administrative Management including the structure of its
Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM), the Organizational chart for Operational
Management along with responsibilities vested at various Levels of Administrative hierarchy. It is
expected that a well thought out method of Institutional Governance and Administration shall be the
key to its growth and success shall be described as follows:

a. Philosophy of Governance

b. Board of Governors

c Organizational Structure and Chart for day-to-day Operations and Management
d. Role and Responsibilities of Key Senior Positions

e. Methods/Style of Administration/Management

11.10 Conceptual Master Plan for Main Campus Development

The details of the Master Plan for Campus Development starting from the selection of a site to the
proposed Land use pattern and the Phase-wise construction of various facilities/ utilities to the Level
of Landscaping. Institutional aspects of development are expected to be taken up in consonance with
the Master Plan keeping in view various aspects of convenience, safety, sustainability and utility of the
facilities shall be described as follows:

a. The Site

b. Proposed Land Use Pattern

c Design Concept with proof of sustainability (As per Green Building Code2017 is mandatory)
d. Infrastructural Facilities in the Campus

e. External Services

f. Construction Systems and Materials

g. Landscape Proposal

11.11 Requirement of Staff, Space, Equipment and their Cost

Make a consolidated estimate of Phase-wise requirements of the Staff, Building, Equipment and their
cost, along with strategies for the mobilization of funds required, as follows:

a. Introduction

b. Faculty Requirements

c Non-Teaching Staff Requirements

d. Building Requirements: Area and Costs
e. Estimated Cost of Equipment

f. Phase-wise Financial Requirements

g. Strategies for Financial Mobilization

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 186 ---
11.12 Action Plan for Implementation

The Activity Chart from the conceptual stage to final implementation, indicating a time- activity Chart
for various activities, its constraints and implementation Strategy including financial out-lay shall be
described as follows:

a. Activity Chart

b. Constraints

C Financial Outlay

d. Strategy for Implementation

11.13 Executive Summary of the Detailed Project Report

A Summary of the DPR as per the following Format for ready reference shall be given:

a Details about the Promoting Body

b. Name and Address of the Promoting Body

lon Date of Registration/ Establishment of the Promoting Body
d. Nature of the Promoting Body

e. Activities of the Promoting Body since inception

f. Constitution of the Promoting Body

11.14 Faculty Data

Academic Nature of Association with Experience in Academic Institutions (in

Qualifications the Promoting Body years)

Technical Non-Technical Promotional | Management | Organizational

11.15 Proposed Institution

a. Details about the Proposed Institution

b. Development Plan for the Proposed Institution
11.16 Graphical Representation

a. Give a bar chart indicating mobilization of funds for the proposed project at the time of
establishment and for next 10 years at intervals of five years.

b. Give a bar chart indicating the recruitment of Faculty (separately for Lecturer, Assistant
Professor, Associate Professor, Professor) for the proposed project at the time of establishment
and for next 10 years at intervals of five years.

c Give a bar chart indicating creation of Built-up area (separately for Instructional, Administrative

and Amenities) for the proposed project at the time of establishment and for next 10 years at
intervals of five years.

d. Give a bar chart indicating investment on Equipment and machinery for the proposed project
at the time of establishment and for next 10 years at intervals of five years.

11.17 Total Project cost (at the time of establishment and next five years)
Year Course(s)/ Built-up Investment Investment Projected Investment Total Project

Intake area/ on on expenditure on the Cost (I to
Proposed Investment Furniture Equipment/ on Salary Library (% in VI) and

(()) to be made and Machinery of Staff per Lakh) (VI) Preoperative
(m2/%) (Il) Accessories (%inLakh) annum (in Exp.) (@ in
(= in Lakh) (IV) Lakh) (V) 1 1))
(II)

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 187 ---
11.18 Details for mobilization/source of funds (capital and recurring) (At the time of establishment and
next five years) (= in lakh)

From Applicant Donations GrantsfromGovernment Fee Others

11.19 Recruitment of Faculty (At the time of establishment and next five years)

Year Professor Associate Professor Asst. Professor Lecturer Total

11.20 Recruitment of non-teaching Staff (at the time of establishment and next five years)

Year Technical Administ Total

11.21 Proposed structure of the governing body

SI. No. Trust/ Society/ Academic Background Industry
Representative

Company
Representative

Technical Non-Technical

11.22 Industry Linkages (at the time of establishment, and next five years)

At least minimum 5 MoUs and proof of relevance have to be produced. Purpose and outcomes of MoU
shall be documented.

DECLARATION

I/We, on behalf of”.....”"hereby confirm that this Detailed Project Report has been prepared for its proposed
Technical Institution under the name and style of”..............." It is hereby confirmed that all the information
furnished above is true to the best of my/ our knowledge and belief and if any information is found to be false,
the proposal shall be rejected.

(Authorized Signatory of the Applicant)

Place: Name
Date: Designation
Seal

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 188 ---
APPENDIX-12

Prevention and Prohibition of Ragging

In view of the directions of the Honorable Supreme Court in SLP No. 24295 of 2006 dated 16-05-2007 and in
Civil Appeal number 887 of 2009, dated 08-05-2009, to prohibit, prevent and eliminate the scourge of ragging,
in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 23 read with Section 10 (b), (g), (p) and (g) of AICTE Act, 1987,
the All India Council for Technical Education has notified Regulations for prevention and prohibition of ragging
in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated 01.07.2009 available on AICTE
Web-Portal http:/ www.aicte-india.org/ anti.htm>download. All AICTE approved Technical Institutions have
to comply with the provisions made in the above Regulations. Any violation of above AICTE Regulations for
the prevention and prohibition of ragging, shall call for punitive action against erring Institutions as per the
provisions made in the above said Regulations.

The Institutions shall have to step up Anti-Ragging mechanism by way of adequate publicity through various
mediums:

. Constitution of Anti-Ragging Committee and Anti Ragging Squad;
. Setting up of Anti-Ragging Cell;
. Installing CCTV cameras at vital points;

. Anti-Ragging Workshops;

. Updating all Web sites with Nodal Officers complete details, alarm bells etc.;

. Regular interaction and counselling with the students;

. Identification of trouble-triggers;

. Mention of Anti-Ragging warning in the Institution’s prospectus and information Booklets/ Brochures

shall be ensured; and

° Surprise inspection of hostels, student accommodation, canteens, rest cum recreational rooms, toilets,
bus-stands and any other measures which would augur well in preventing/ quelling ragging and any
uncalled for behavior / incident shall be undertaken.

Students in distress due to ragging related incidents can call the National Anti-Ragging Helpline No. 1800-180-
5522 (24x7 Toll Free) or e-mail: helpline@antiragging.in.

The Institution approved by AICTE may be requested to hold Workshops and Seminars on eradication of ragging
in higher Educational Institutions. They may be requested to display Anti Ragging posters at all prominent
places such as Admission Centre, Departments, Library, Canteen, Hostel, Common facilities etc. The size of
posters should be 8’x6'

The Institution may be requested to submit an online compliance of Anti-Ragging Regulations on curbing the
menace of ragging in the Technical Institutions, 2009 at www.antiragging.in.

Institutions may be requested to make it compulsory for each student and every parent to submit an online
undertaking every academic year at www.antiragging.in and www.amanmovement.org.

Further, the attention of all the Institutions may also be invited to the Third amendment to UGC Regulations
dated 29 June, 2016 expanding the definition of ragging by including the following:

“3(j) Any act of physical or mental abuse (including bullying and exclusion) targeted at another student (fresher
or otherwise) on the ground of color, race, religion, caste, ethnicity, gender (including transgender), sexual
orientation, appearance, nationality, regional origins, linguistic, identity, place of birth, place of residence or
economic background”.

| 15 AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 189 ---
APPENDIX-13
Structure of Various Committees

13.1 The Council

S.0.1165 (E)-in exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) and (4) of Section3 of the
All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (520f1987), the Council comprises of 51
members of which following 33 members have been nominated by MoE.

The Chairman, AICTE

The Vice Chairman, AICTE

Secretary, Department of Higher Education, MoE

Additional Secretary, Technical Education, Department of Higher Education, MoE
Chairman, Central Regional Committee, AICTE

Chairman, North Western Regional Committee, AICTE

Chairman, South Central Regional Committee, AICTE

Chairman, South Western Regional Committee, AICTE

Chairman, All India Board of Hospitality and Tourism Management, AICTE
Chairman, All India Board of Architecture, AICTE

Chairman, All India Board of Information and Technology, AICTE
Chairman, All India Board of Pharmacy, AICTE 1/3
Chairman, All India Board of Town and Country Planning, AICTE members
Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor (MoE)

Secretary, Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship

Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology

Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises

Secretary, Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Telangana

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Tripura

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Uttar Pradesh

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Uttarakhand

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Arunanchal Pradesh
Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, West Bengal

Secretary, Technical Education/ Higher Education, Andhra Pradesh

Four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the organizations-in
the field of Industry and Commerce.

Chairman, University Grants Commission, New Delhi

President, Association of Indian Universities

Executive Secretary, Indian Society for Technical Education

President, Pharmacy Council of India

Vice President, Council of Architecture

Director General, National Productivity Council

President, Indian Institute of Metals

President, The Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers
President, Institute of Chemical Engineers

Former Vice Chancellor of Technological University

Director, Institution of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi

Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi
Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi
Member Secretary, AICTE - Member Secretary

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 190 ---
13.2 The Executive Committee

Composition Quorum

The Chairman, AICTE

The Vice-Chairman, AICTE

Secretary to the Gol in Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Education (Ex- Officio)
Two Chairmen of the Regional Committees

Three Chairmen of the Board of Studies

A member of the Council representing the Ministry of Finance of the Central Government.

(Ex-Officio) 1/3
(Four out of eight members of the Council representing the States and Union Territories on members
rotation)

Four Members with expertise and distinction in areas relevant to Technical Education to be
nominated by the Chairman of the Council

The Chairman, UGC (Ex-Officio)

The Director, IAMR (Ex-Officio)

The Director, ICAR (Ex-Officio)

Member Secretary, AICTE - Member Secretary

13.3. Regional Committee

Composition Quorum

Chairman to be nominated by the Chairman, AICTE

Four Members to be nominated from amongst the Directors/ Principals of recognized Technical
Institutions, i.e. IIT, NIT, NITTTR, Engineering Colleges, Diploma Institutions in the region

Four eminent persons in the field of Industry, Labour, Commerce and Professional
representatives from the Pharmacy Council of India, Council of Architecture, Confederation of
Indian Industries and Professional Societies to be nominated by the Chairman, AICTE

One member representing the Board of Apprenticeship Training to the nominated by the Board

Three members from amongst Chairman, State Board of Technical Education, Chairman, State

Industrial Liaison Board,
1/3

Secretary incharge of the Department of Technical Education of each State and UT comprised in| members

the region or Director, Technical Education (Ex-Officio) by rotation in alphabetical order of the
State, UT in the region.

One Vice Chancellor or his/ her nominee not below the Level of Dean/ Principal) of the
University/ Institution Deemed to be University dealing with Technical Education by rotation in
alphabetical order of the State, UT in the region.

One Officer of Bureau of Technical Education, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary,
Department of Education, Gol (Ex-Officio)

One Advisor of the Bureau, Regional Committees, AICTE (Ex-Officio)
Regional Officer of the Regional Office (Ex-Officio) - Member Secretary

13.4 Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny under Chapter | of Approval Process Handbook

Composition

Professor/ Associate Professor of IIT/IIM/ NIT/ Government/ Government aided Institutions
An advocate registered with Bar Council
An Architect registered with Council of Architecture

or Professor /Associate Professor of Civil Engineering (Structural)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 191 ---
13.5 Scrutiny / Re-Scrutiny under Chapter Il of Approval Process Handbook

Composition
Two Professors/ Associate Professors of IIT/ IIM/ NIT/ Government/ Government aided Institutions

13.6 Expert Visit Committee

An academician not below the Level of Professor in a field of Technical Education to be selected from
the panel of Experts approved by the Executive Committee, AICTE

One Expert member, not below the Level of Associate Professor or an Industry expert (with minimum 5
years of experience) to be selected from the panel of Experts.

Architect registered with Council of Architecture or CPWD, National Buildings Construction Corporation
(NBCC),DRDO, CSIR or Professor /Associate Professor of Civil Engineering (Structural)/Assistant Professor
of Architecture or Professor/ Associate Professor of Planning.

13.7 Standing Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee

Retired High Court Judge or an Educationist/ academician of eminence not below the Level of Vice-
Chancellor of a University (Retired or in position) or Director (Retired or in position) of IIT/ NIT/IIM or
Government Institution of National importance as Chairman.

One expert member not below the Level of Associate Professor in the field of Technical Education from
IITs or IIMs or Government or Government aided Institution or Government Universities or Institutions of
National Importance.

An Officer not below the rank of Deputy Director of the revenue Department or an Architect registered
with Council of Architecture or Professor of Civil Engineering or Professor of Planning or expert who is
well versed with Land and revenue matters to be nominated by the Chairman, AICTE

NOTE:

Depending on the requirement, concerned State Government/ UT/ affiliating University/ Board representative
not below the Level of Associate Professor may be co-opted in the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee/
SHC/ SAC.

Expert Visit Committee may comprise of one Academician specialised in the Programme offered at the
Institution to be visited and the other Academician having the specialisation in Engineering and Technology
Programme.

In case of Institutions Deemed to be Universities, a Vice Chancellor/ Former Vice Chancellor/ Director of IIT/ NIT
nominated by AICTE shall be the Chairman of the Expert Visit

13.8 Standing Complaint Scrutiny Committee (SCSC)

Composition Quorum

Retired Judge of a High Court. Chairman

Two expert members not below the Level of Associate Any TWO Members
Professor in the fields of Technical Education.

An Architect, Registered with Council of Architecture or
Professor of Civil Engineering.

Director of Technical Education/ Registrar (Serving or
Retired of Technical Institution/ University)

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 192 ---
13.9 Role and Responsibilities of Various Committees

Committee Role and Responsibilities

The Council To perform such functions as specified in Section 10 of AICTE Act, 1987

The Executive Committee To perform such functions as assigned to it by the Council as specified in
Section 10 of AICTE Act, 1987

Regional Committee Providing recommendations about the issuance of approval for the new/

existing Technical Institutions based on the observations of Scrutiny/
Expert Visit Committee (as applicable).

Scrutiny Committee Verify the authenticity of the documents submitted by the Applicant as
specified in Appendix 16/ 17 (as applicable) of the Approval Process
Handbook.

Expert Visit Committee (EVC) Online/ Offline Visit of the premises of Institution to verify the availability
of Infrastructural facilities and Faculty with respect to the norms specified
inthe Approval Process Handbook.

Standing Hearing Committee To assess the compliance of the deficiencies observed in the report of the

(SHC) Expert Visit Committee/ for Show Cause Notice issued to the Institution.
Standing Appellate Committee | To assess the compliance of the deficiencies observed in Standing
(SAC) Hearing Committee while considering the appeals of Institutions
Standing Complaint Scrutiny Processing of any Complaint(s) received aboutan Institution.
Committee (SCSC)

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 193 ---
APPENDIX-14
Regional Offices of AICTE

Regional Offices

STD
Code

Telephone

Jurisdiction

NITIE Campus, Vihar Lake,
Mumbai-400087

E-mail: wro@aicte-india.org

Central Airport By pass Road, 0755 2744313 Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat
Gandhinagar, Bhopal, Madhya and Chhattisgarh
Pradesh 462033 0265 2750648
E-mail: cro@aicte-india.org
Eastern Govt. College of Engineering 033 23357459 Andaman and Nicobar,
and Leather Technology Sikkim, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Campus, LB Block, Sector Ill, 23357312 Assam, Manipur,
Salt Lake City, Kolkata 700 106 23353089 Nagaland, Mizoram,
. oe Tripura, Meghalaya,
E-mail: ero@aicte-india.org 23358808 | Arunachal Pradesh, West
Bengal
23356690
23359546
Northern Adjoining Directorate 0512 2585014 Uttar Pradesh,
of Technical Education, Uttarakhand, Bihar
Vikas Nagar, Zoo Road, 2585018
Kanpur-208002 2581263
E-mail: nro@aicte-india.org 2585012
North-West NWRO, Plot No.1, 5th Floor,DTE, | 0172 2613326 Chandigarh,
Punjab Building, Sector 36 A, Haryana, Jammu &
Chandigarh-160 036 2661201 Kashmir,Ladakh, Delhi,
Punjab, Rajasthan,
E-mail: nwro@aicte-india.org 2660179 Himachal Pradesh
Southern Shastri Bhawan, 26, Haddows 044 28275650 Tamil Nadu, Puducherry
Road, Nungambakkam,
Chennai - 600 006 28279998
E-mail: sro@aicte-india.org 28232754
28255863
South Central West Block Nos. 201-204 & 040 23340113 Andhra Pradesh,
221 to 224, 2nd Floor, Swarna Telangana
Jayanti Commercial Complex, 23341036
Ameerpet, Hyderabad 500038 23345071
Telangana
E-mail: scro@aicte-india.org
South-West PK. Block, Palace Road, 080 22253232 Karnataka
Bangalore — 560 009
22205919
E-mail: swro@aicte-india.org
29574357
Western AICTE-Western Regional 022 28475793 Goa, Maharashtra,
Office, Industrial Centre, Daman and Diu, Dadra
28470019

and Nagar Haveli

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 158 |
--- Page 194 ---
Guwahati Camp Eastern Region Camp 0361 2570104 Assam, Manipur,
Office Office,Assam Engineering Nagaland, Mizoram,
College Campus, Jalukbari, Tripura, Meghalaya,
Guwahati - 781013, Assam Arunachal Pradesh
E-mail: coguwahati@aicte-
india.org

Thiruvananthapuram | AICTE South Western Region 0471 2592323 Kerala and Lakshadweep
Camp Office Camp Office, CET Campus,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 2594343
695 016 2596363
E-mail: aicte.tvpm@aicte-india.
org

Vadodara Camp Camp Office Vadodara 0265 2750648 Gujarat
Office

Central Regional Camp Office, 2750614
A-1,2 Quarters, Chameli Baug,
Campus of M.S. University of
Baroda, Vadodara- 390002

E-mail: covadodara@aicte-
india.org

Any Queries/Clarifications related to policy shall be sent ONLY to helpdeskab@aicte-india.org and All
technical queries (portal related) shall be sent ONLY to helpdesk1 @aicte-india.org

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 195 ---
APPENDIX-15

Grievance Redressal Mechanism for Students and Faculty

In order to provide opportunities for redressal of certain grievances of students already enrolled in any
institution, as well as for those seeking admission to such institutions, AICTE has notified All India Council
for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students) Regulation, 2019 vide F.No.1- 101/PGRC/AICTE/
Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019 for establishment of grievance redressal mechanism for all AICTE approved
Technical Institutions. Non-compliance of the above Regulations shall call for punitive action.

Guidelines for Establishment of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for students and faculty.

Refer: Redressal of Grievance of Students Regulation, 2019 vide F.No.1-101/PGRC/AICTE / Regulation / 2019
dated 07.11.2019 and Appendix 6.3.2.

It is mandatory for all Technical Institutions to address the grievances of faculty/staff members including service
matters at the Institution level itself. A Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC) for faculty/staff members shall
be constituted by each Institution to look into the grievances of the faculty/staff members. The composition of
the GRC shall be as follows:

a) Principal of the Institution as Chairperson
b) One Senior Professor of the affiliating University as a Member

c) One official from University or State DTE (Directorate of Technical Education) (to be nominated by
DTE/University Vice Chancellor) as a Member

d) One Senior Faculty (not below Associate Professor) as Member.

i. A complaint from an aggrieved faculty/staff member relating to the institution shall be addressed to the
Chairperson, Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC).

ii. The GRC shall send its report with recommendations, if any, to the concerned DTE or University and a copy
thereof to the aggrieved faculty/staff member, within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of the
complaint.

iii. In case faculty/staff is not satisfied with the decision of Grievance Redressal Committee, they may appeal to
the concerned affiliating University/State DTE (in case of diploma institute) for redressal of their grievance.

The University level or DTE level Grievance Redressal Cell established by the University or DTE shall address
such grievances and settle the matter at State/University level.

An Institution shall furnish, prominently, on its website, all relevant information in respect of the Grievance
Redressal Committee(s) coming under its purview.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 196 ---
APPENDIX-16

Documents to be uploaded/submitted for Setting up a
New Technical Institution offering a Technical Programme
at Diploma/ Post Diploma Certificate/ Under Graduate
Degree/ Post Graduate Diploma/ Post Graduate Degree
Level

16.1 Documents to be uploaded/submitted at the time of the Scrutiny Committee

The Applicant shall present following supporting documents in original along with one copy, duly self-
attested and other necessary information to the Scrutiny Committee. As per Affidavit 2 supporting
documents other than Affidavits shall be made and duly authenticated by the authorized signatory of
Applicant or by the Head of the Institution.

+ Building Plan of the Institution should have been prepared by an Architect registered with Council
of Architecture/ Licensed Surveyor and approved by the Competent Authority as designated by
concerned State Government/ UT. The Institution should upload/bring two copies of Building Plan.

+ An Affidavit 2 as prescribed on the Web-Portal, on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ e-stamp paper of
=100/-, duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

+ Resolution of the Applicant Organization in a Format 3 as prescribed on the Web-Portal.

+ In Metro and Mega Cities, Certificate of Occupancy Certificate/ Completion Certificate/ Building
License/ Form D (as applicable) from the Competent Authority (as per standard format prescribed
by the issuing Authority). For the rest, an Affidavit on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ e-stamp paper of
=100/-, duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner, that
the same shall be produced on completion of the Building.

+ Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority.

+ Certificate 1 issued by an Advocate regarding Land related documents.

+ Certificate 2 issued by an Architect regarding approved Building Plans.

+ Certificate 3 issued by the Bank Manager regarding financial status of the Applicant.

+ Ahard copy of the complete application as uploaded to AICTE Web-Portal, printed there on.

+ Areceipt with the Official Seal from the authorized signatory of the State Government/ UT as proof
of submission of these documents.

+ A receipt with the Official Seal from the authorized signatory of the affiliating University/ Board as
proof of submission of these documents (exempted for Institution applying for PGDM).

+ A registration document of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ PPP/ BOT indicating its members,
objectives and Memorandum of Association and Rules, duly attested/ certified by the concerned
Competent Authority.

+ For Standalone PGDM Institutions, details of the recommended composition of the Board of
Governors of the Institution constituted as per Appendix 18 of the Approval Process Handbook.

+ In the case of a Company established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013, the MoA and
Rules must contain a provision that the objective of the Company is not profit making and any
surplus earning shall be used exclusively for the purpose of development of Technical Institution.

+ Incase of an application made with a proposal of PPP/ BOT, the Applicant shall submit a certified
copy/ duly attested by a Gazette Officer of the agreement/ contract regarding PPP/ BOT. The
Applicant shall also submit a Certificate or endorsement from the concerned District Magistrate or

| AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 197 ---
the SDM, regarding such a proposal pertaining to the PPP/ BOT in the said area with the Applicant
Trust/ Society/ Company.

+ Resolution of the Applicant Organization, pertaining to start a Technical Institution and allocation
of Land/ Building/ funds to proposed activities in the Format 3 prescribed on the Web-Portal.

+ Documents showing ownership of Land/ Building as per the provisions of Section 8 of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the time being in force relating to transfer of property to
or by Companies, Associations or bodies of individuals, in the name of the Applicant in the form of
Registered Settlement Deed/ Registered Sale Deed/ Irrevocable Gift Deed (Registered)/ Irrevocable
Government/ Private Lease Deed (Registered) (for a period of minimum 30 years) (including
Commitment for continued lease) with at least live Lease of the maximum duration of programs
at the time of submission of application. However, Private Lease of Building is permissible ONLY for
Mega/ Metro cities due to the scarcity of Land and incase of highly skilled and employabe courses.

That Joint Affidavit 7 by the parties that the lease of Land is irrevocable for 30 years of which
25 years is still live shall have to be given on a Non-Judicial stamp/ e-stamp paper of %100/- duly
sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate/Notary/Oath Commissioner. The ownership of the
Land shall remain with the lessor but as long as the promoter uses that Land, within the conditions
imposed by the Lessor, the ownership shall deem to be that of the lessee.

In case, the Land documents are in vernacular Language, notarized English translation of the
documents shall be produced.

Documents to be submitted, in case of Private Lease of Land/ Building: Private Lease of Land

+ Original document of Private Lease registered between the Lessor and Lessee with Competent
Authority under the Registration Act (It should have a validity of more than 25 years as on date
of the notification issued by the Council)

+ Land Conversion Certificate issued by the Competent Authority
+ Land Use Certificate issued by the Competent Authority

+ Title documents of the Lessor referring to its acquisition of leasehold rights through a lawful
transaction

+  Encumbrance Certificate relating to the property on a date not later than the date of issue of
notification issued by the Council

+ Resolution of the Trust/Society/ Company, if the Lessor is either of those

+ NOC from the Charity Commissioner if the Lessor is a Trust and NOC from the Registrar of
Cooperative Societies, if the Lessor is a Society

. In case of Sub Lease, the Lessor (then Lessee) should have the right to assign the leasehold
right in the form of a registered document

Private Lease of Building
Mortgage of Land shall not be permissible.
+ Complete Building Plan approved by the Competent Authority

+ If the building is multi-storied and certain floors only are leased, then the complete Floor Plan
prepared by an Architect clearly indicating the details in addition to the Complete Building Plan
approved by the Competent Authority

+ Occupancy/ Completion Certificate relating to the property/ floors issued by the Competent
Authority

+ Building Permission Certificate issued by the Competent Authority. (If the permitted use is
Residential, then the application to be rejected)

+ Title documents of the Land referring to the acquisition/leasehold right over the said property

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 162 |
--- Page 198 ---
Lease deed registered by the Competent Authority under Registration Act
Non-agricultural Cess paid receipt for the last three years

Municipal taxes paid receipt for the last three years

Fire NOC

Land Use Certificate permitting the Land to be used for Educational purpose, from the Competent
Authority along with Topo sketch/ Village Map indicating Land Survey Numbers and a copy of road
map showing location of the proposed site of the Institution.

Land Conversion Certificate permitting the Land to be used for an Educational purpose to establish
an Institution, from the Competent Authority along with Topo sketch/ Village Map indicating Land
Survey Numbers and a copy of road map showing location of the proposed site of the Institution.

Land Classification Certificate of the Competent Authority indicating whether the Land for the
proposed new Technical Institution/ Technical Campus falls in the rural area or otherwise.

Khasra Plan (Master Plan) issued by the Competent Authority, earmarking the entire proposed Land
to show that the Land is contiguous.

Wherever applicable, FSI/ FAR Certificate shall have been obtained from the Competent Authority
as designated by the concerned Municipal Corporation or the local authority that approves Building
Plans or the State Government/ UT.

Site Plan, Building Plan of proposed Technical Institution prepared by an Architect registered
with Council of Architecture (CoA)/ Licensed Surveyor and duly approved by the Competent Plan
Sanctioning Authority of the concerned State Government/ UT.

Floor Plans, sections and elevations of all proposed/ existing Buildings exclusively intended for use
for the proposed Institution at the permanent site with a table clearly mentioning all rooms, with
carpet area of each in m 2, as specified in Instructional, Administrative and Amenities requirements
certified by the Architect registered with the Council of Architecture. Safety and hygiene precautions
ensured during partial occupation, if any, certified by the Architect registered with the Council of
Architecture.

Phase-wise Plan of construction to achieve total carpet and Built-up area as required for conduct of
all applied/ existing Course(s) from the first to final year. This shall be certified by Architect registered
with the Council of Architecture.

Proof of the availability of nomenclature of the applied Course(s) in the affiliating University/ Board.

Proof of working capital (funds) as stated in Clause 1.5.3 of the Approval Process Handbook, in
the form of either Fixed Deposits in the Bank or latest Bank Statement of Accounts maintained by
the Applicant Organization in a Nationalized Bank or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by
Reserve Bank of India, along with a Certificate issued by the Branch Manager of the Bank.

Audited statement of accounts of the Applicant Organization for last three years, as may be
applicable.

Certificate regarding Minority Status, if applicable at the time of application.
Detailed Project Report (DPR).

Undertaking from the Applicant to the effect that no high tension line is passing through the
Campus including hostel. In case high tension line passes through the Campus/ hostel, a Certificate
from the Competent Authority (Electricity Board) that it shall not affect the safety of the Building/
students/ Faculty/ Staff etc. is required.

In case of Buildings constructed by Government Departments before 50 years, for Government/
Government aided Institutions/ State or Central University/ Defence Institutions where the

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 199 ---
documents could not be submitted, a letter from the Competent Authority that the Building norms
of AICTE are fulfilled shall be produced to this effect.

16.2 Documents to be submitted at the time of the Expert Visit Committee

The Applicant shall present following supporting documents in original along with one copy, duly
attested by a Gazette Officer or a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner and
other necessary information to the Expert Visit Committee.

Copy of the advertisement in at least one National Daily, for recruitment of Principal/ Director
and Faculty members.

Stock Register of dead stock items including Laboratory Equipment, Computers, system and
application software, printers, Office Equipment and other dead stock items.

Proof of provision of Internet bandwidth in Mbps and contention ratio.

List giving titles of Books and Volumes of each purchased for the Library.

Copy of Invoice/ Cash Memo for Equipment and Library Books.

List and details of hard copy of National Journals subscribed.

List and details of hard copy of International Journals subscribed.

Details of subscription of Journals as per Appendix 10 of the Approval Process Handbook.
Sanction of electrical load by electric supply provider Company.

A Certificate by an Architect, giving details of sewage disposal system, barrier free environment
and toilets created for physically challenged and all weather motorable approach roads.

Details and proof of telephone connections available at the proposed Technical Institution.
Details and proof about medical facility and counselling arrangements.
Details of reprographic facility available for students.

Details of all other Educational Institutions run by the same Trust/ Society/ Company or by any
other Trust/ Society/ Company to which the Chairman/ Secretary of the Applicant is a member.

Video recording with brief outline of the Institute and its facilities (Front and Back side of the
entire Institution Building(s) Internal portion of the Class Rooms, Tutorial Rooms, Laboratories,
Workshop, Drawing Hall, Computer Centre, Library, Reading Room, Seminar Hall and all other
rooms, as mentioned in Programme wise Instructional area requirements, Internal portion of
the principal's room, Board room, main Office, Departmental Offices, Faculty cabins/ seating
arrangement and all other rooms as mentioned in Administrative area requirements, Internal
portion of toilet facilities, boys and girls common rooms, Cafeteria and all other rooms as
mentioned in Amenities area requirements, circulation area details highlighting entrance
lobby, passages, escalators, staircases and other common areas) as required by the EVC shall be
prepared in advance by Director/Principal and Video Recording of about 30 minutes shall be
uploaded on YouTube and URL link shall be provided in the AICTE portal for advance viewing
by the committee members before the EVC.

16.3 Documents to be uploaded after the issuance of LoA

New Technical Institutions granted Letter of Approval and the existing Institutions granted
approval for Introduction of new Course(s) Division(s) Programme(s) and change in Intake
capacity, shall comply with appointment of Faculty members and Principal/ Director as the
case may be, as per Policy regarding minimum qualifications pay scales, norms etc., as specified
in the Approval Process Handbook.

Institutions other than Minority Institutions shall appoint Principal/ Director/ Teaching Staff
strictly in accordance with the norms prescribed by the Council and other Technical Supporting
Staff and Administrative Staff strictly in accordance with the methods and procedures of the

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 164 |
--- Page 200 ---
16.4

16.5

16.6

concerned State Government/ UT, particularly in case of selection procedures and selection
Committees.

The information about these appointments of Staff in the prescribed Format shall be uploaded
in AICTE Web-Portal.

In no circumstance, unless the appointment of all Faculty members and other Staff is in place,
the Institutions shall start the approved Technical Course(s).

Faculty and non-teaching Staff data shall be entered as per the prescribed Format.

Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of an
existing Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution

in the same premises in the same year

No Objection Certificate from Concerned State Government/ UT in the Format 1.
No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Closure of the
Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year/
Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-
versa/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/To start new Programme/
Level in the existing Institutions, as applicable, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the
Format 3.

Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of the
establishment of the Institution set up by a Private Limited or Public Limited Company/ Industry

Certificate of Registration of companies

Memorandum of Association and Article of Association
Certificate of incorporation

Availability of the registered office of the company
Particulars of the Directors, Managers or Secretaries
PAN number

TAN number

Companies general rules and forms

NOC from Directors or Promoters

Audited Statement for the last 3 years clearly indicating turnover through operations

Documents expected to be presented to the Scrutiny/ Expert Committee are specified in Annexure
13 of the Approval Process Handbook.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 201 ---
APPENDIX-17
Documents to be Submitted for

+ Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

+ — Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)
+ Change of Site/ Location

+ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa
+ To start new Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

+ Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in
the same Campus or City

+ Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake

+ — Introduction/ Continuation of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/
Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/ Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

+ Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-versa
+ — Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)

+ — Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course

+ Closure of the Institution

+ — Introduction/ Continuation of Fellow Programme in Management

+ Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in
Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/Course(s)

+ Change in the Name of the Institution or Affiliating University/ Board or Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)

+ Change in the Minority Status of the Institution

+ Change in the Name of the Bank

+ Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/Company
+ Extended EoA

17.1 Documents to be uploaded for the issuance of EoA based on Self-Disclosure/after a break in the
preceding Academic Years/ Restoration of Intake

Supporting documents including the Affidavits shall be duly authenticated by the Chairman/ Secretary
of the Trust/ Society/ Company in case of Self-Financing Institutions or by the Authorized person in case
of the Government/ Government aided Institution.

In case of Buildings constructed by Government Departments before 50 years, for Government/
Government aided Institutions/ State or Central University/ Defence Institutions where the documents
could not be submitted, a letter from the Competent Authority that the Building norms of AICTE are
fulfilled shall be produced to this effect.

. An Affidavit 2 with digital signature of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company
on ane-stamp paper of =100/- duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or
an Oath Commissioner.

. Copy of pay receipt print made on AICTE Web-Portal if any, in respect of Extension of Approval
for the Academic Year 2021-22.

. As per Clause 7.17 of the Approval Process Handbook, valid Occupancy/ Completion
Certificate/ Building License/ Form D issued by the Competent Authority.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 166 |
--- Page 202 ---
Valid Structural Stability Certificate from the registered Structural Engineer, if the Building
is more than thirty years from the issue of Completion Certificate that the Building is fit for
human habitation.

A valid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority.

Satellite map, using suitable Web site, showing geographical location of the Land with latitude
and longitude at the entrance of the main Building mentioned on it.

Show Cause Notice issued by AICTE, if any, during the last two years.
Details of the Court cases filed against AICTE and the order of the Court, if any.

For Adjunct Faculty - One-page CV highlighting his/ her industrial experience, Willingness
letter to handle the Course(s) including his/ her commitments in other Institutions, copy of
appointment order and acceptance of appointment from him/her.

Audited statement of accounts of the Trust/ Society/ Company for the previous year.

Certificate by the Head of the Institution to the effect that all Faculty and all non-teaching Staff
data and all student data of all years and all Course(s), has been entered as per the prescribed
Format on the Web-Portal.

17.2. Additional documents to be uploaded for approval of the Introduction of seats for Non Resident
Indian(s)

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Introduction of seats
for Sons/ Daughters of Non Resident Indian(s) duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the
Format 3.

17.3 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of an
existing Institution applied for Change of Site/ Location/ Conversion of Women’s Institution into
Co-ed Institution/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/ To start new
Programme/ Level in the existing Institutions

All Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook (Not applicable
for the Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level).

No Objection Certificate from Concerned State Government/ UT in the Format 1 (Not applicable
for the existing Institution to Start new Programme(s)/Level(s)).

No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

n case of Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa, a receipt with the
Official Seal from the authorized signatory of the (to be) affiliating University/Board as proof of
submission of these documents.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Closure of the
nstitution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year/
Change of Site/Location/Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-
versa/ Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level and vice-versa/To start new Programme/
Level in the existing Institutions, as applicable, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the
Format 3.

NOTE: No Land relaxation and refund of additional FDR/ Security Deposit allowed in case of
Conversion of Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution.

17.4 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of an
existing Institution applied for Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company
operating in the same Campus

All Documents as specified in Appendix 16 of the Approval Process Handbook (except the
Institutions fulfilling Clause 2.10.2 (b) of the Approval Process Handbook).

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 203 ---
No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Merger of Institutions
under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus, as applicable, duly
signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

17.5 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Expert Visit Committee for approval of the
Introduction of supernumerary seats for OCI/ Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in
the Gulf Countries in existing Institutions

Valid NBA Accreditation Certificate beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year.
Details regarding hostel facilities and hostel administration.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Introduction of
supernumerary seats for OCI Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian Workers in the Gulf Countries
duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.6 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of online Scrutiny Committee for approval of
Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s)/ Courses in Indian Language / Introduction of Integrated/
Dual Degree Course Introduction of Fellow Programme in Management/ Extended EoA, as
applicable

An Affidavit 8 on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of = 100/- duly sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner (Not applicable for Extended
EoA).

In case of increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s), valid NBA Accreditation Certificate shall be
beyond 10th April of the current Calendar Year.

In case of Extended EoA, valid NBA Accreditation Certificate beyond 10th April of the next
Calendar Year for Institutions in existence for more than SEVEN YEARS/ FIVE YEARS for
Institutions offering ONLY MCA/ MBA Programmes, from the date of establishment of the
Institution or UGC Autonomy Letter or AICTE Graded Autonomy Letter for Standalone
Institutions beyond 10th April of the next Calendar Year and the conferment letter from the
affiliating University (as applicable as per the application).

No Objection Certificate from Affiliating University/ Board for Introduction of Additional
Course(s) / Courses in Indian Language/ Introduction of Integrated / Dual Degree Course(s)/ in
the Format 2.

Proof for the existence of Faculty with Ph.D./Fellow qualification as per the number of seats, in
case of Introduction of Fellow Programme in Management.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for starting additional
Course(s)/ Division(s) in existing Programme and allocation of Land/ Building/ funds for the
proposed activities duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.7. Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of
Progressive Closure/ Complete Closure of the Institution

No Objection Certificate from Concerned State Government/ UT in the given Format 1.

No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2 with clear mention
about the provisions/ alternative arrangements made to take care of Education of existing
students studying in the Institution.

Latest salary sheet giving details, such as, scale of pay, gross pay, PF deduction, TDS for all
Faculty members and non-teaching Staff and Faculty: Student ratio.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 168 |
--- Page 204 ---
Details of the RPGF/ Joint FDR made with AICTE/ State Government/ UT/ University/ Board for
the establishment of the Institution.

Status of Students already studying in the Institution.
Status of Faculty and Staff in the Institution and liabilities there on.

Affidavit 4 to be submitted by the Applicant on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of
=100/- duly sworn before a First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner
stating that the Applicant has no liability with respect to Faculty members, Staff, students etc.

Pending Court cases and serious charges, violation of norms, pending Ragging cases against
the Institution.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Closure of the Institution, duly signed
by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.8 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of the
Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)/ Conversion of Courses
into allied Vocational Courses

An Affidavit 2 on a Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/e-stamp paper of =100/- , duly sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner (not applicable to Change of
type of Institution).

No Objection Certificate from the affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for the Change of Type
of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)/ Conversion of Courses into allied
Vocational Courses, duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.9 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of
the Change in the Name of Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s).

No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board with clear mention about provisions/
alternative arrangements made to take care of Education of existing students studying in
the Institution in the Format 2 as prescribed on the Web-Portal (Applicable for Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)).

NOC from University/ Board/ State Government/ UT shall not be required for reduction of Non-
Zero Intake of Course(s)/ Programme(s)/ Reduction in number of Division(s)/ Merger of the
Courses.

Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of
the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s)/
duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.10 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change
in the Name of the Institution/ Change in the Minority Status of the Institution

No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2 or A receipt with
the Official Seal from the authorized signatory of the affiliating University/ Board as proof
of submission of these documents (Not applicable to Change in the Minority Status of the
Institution).

Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of
the Institution/ Change in the Minority Status of the Institution duly signed by the Chairman/
Secretary in the Format 3.

Government Order of the concerned State/UT declaring the Society/Institution as Minority
Society/ Institution or approval from the National Commission for Minority Educational
Institutions along with the specified duration (if any).

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 205 ---
17.11 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change
in the Name of the affiliating University/Board

No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the University/ Board where the Institution is affiliated in
the Format 2.

No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the University/ Board where the Institution seeks
affiliation in the Format 2.

Resolution of the Trust/Society/Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of
the affiliating University/ Board duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

17.12 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change
in the Name of the Bank

A notarized Affidavit 9 of the Chairman/Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company stating the
reasons for the Change in the Name of the Bank.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Institution for Change in the Name of
the Bank duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in the Format 3.

° In case of merger of banks, NOC/Certificate from the bank to the effect that two or more banks
are merged subject to government notification.

17.13 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for approval of Change in
the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/ Company (subject to the Law for the time being in force)

Approval from Charity Commissioner / Registrar of Societies / Registrar of Companies for
Change in the Name/Address of the Trust/ Society/Company or merger of Trusts/Societies/Companies

No Objection Certificate from Concerned State Government/ UT in the Format 1.
No Objection Certificate from affiliating University/ Board in the Format 2.

A notarized Affidavit 10 of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company stating
that there is no commercial or business angle for such change.

A registration document of the Trust/ Society/ Company indicating its members, objectives and
Memorandum of Association and Rules, duly attested/ certified by the concerned Authority.

Details of the recommended Board of Governors of the Institution constituted as per
Appendix 18 of the Approval Process Handbook.

In case of aCompany established under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013, the MoA and Rules
must contain a provision that the objective of the Company is not profit making and any surplus
earning shall be used exclusively for the purpose of development of Technical Institution.

Land Documents showing ownership in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/Company.

In case of merger of Trust/ Society/ Company, the transferor Trust/ Society/ Company should
transfer its Land, assets and Infrastructure by a registered transfer/conveyance deed in the
Name of the transferee Trust/ Society/Company.

Proof of working capital (funds) as stated in Clause1.5.3 of Chapter | of the Approval Process
Handbook, in the form of either Fixed Deposits in the Bank or latest Bank Statement of
Accounts maintained in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company in a Nationalized Bank
or Scheduled Commercial Bank recognized by Reserve Bank of India, along with a Certificate
issued by the Branch Manager of the Bank.

Approval from the Charity Commissioner/ Registrar of Societies/ Registrar of Companies
regarding any change in the Name(s) of the Trustee(s)/Member(s).

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/
Company, mentioning the reasons for such Change in the Name duly signed by the Chairman/
Secretary in the Format 3.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 206 ---
17.14 Additional documents to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for Approval of
Collaboration and Twinning Programme(s)

The Foreign University/ Institution shall furnish an authorized signatory letter declaring
therein that the Diploma/Degree/ Post Diploma Certificate awarded to the students in India
shall be recognized in the Parent Country and shall be treated equivalent to the corresponding
Diploma/ Degree/ Post Diploma Certificate awarded by the University/ Institution at Parent
Country.

Letter of the Trustee on the Fee to be charged and the Intake in each Course to be offered by
a Foreign University/ Institution or the Technical Institution approved by the Council having
Collaboration with Foreign University/ Institution, leading to a Diploma/ Degree/ Post Diploma
Certificate.

A letter of the Trustee and the Foreign University/ Institution declaring the detailed guidelines
for admission, entry Level qualifications, Fee of all kinds, the examination and evaluation and
that there shall not be major deviations with the prescribed procedures in their Parent Country,
vis-a-vis India.

A Letter of the Trustee wherein details of the Semesters that are conducted in India and Foreign
Country as per Clause 3.2 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Bipartite agreement/ MoU between the Foreign University/ Institution and the Indian Partner
Institution for this purpose.

Bipartite agreement/ MoU between the Indian Institution and the concerned affiliating
University/ Board for this purpose.

Affidavit 11 clearly mentioning among other provisions that the students failing to get Visa
shall be accommodated in a similar Programme and that the University/Board shall register
them for the purpose.

Attested Proof from Foreign University/ Institution that a similar Degree/ Diploma is offered in
the Parent Country.

Letter of affiliation of the Indian Partner Institution with the University/ Board as applicable.

A letter from the participating Foreign University that the Degree would be awarded by the
Foreign University/ Institution only in its Parent Country.

No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the concerned Embassy in India with a mention of
genuineness of Foreign Educational Partnering Institution in the Country of origin.

Certificate of accreditation/Ranking within top 500 as per QS World Ranking obtained by
the Foreign University/ Institution in their Parent Country issued by a certified accreditation
authority in that Country.

Valid Certificate of NBA / NIRF ranking within top 100 by Universities /Institutesin respect of the
Course(s) to be offered under Collaboration and Twinning Programme.

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company approving the Introduction of Collaboration
and Twinning Programme in the Institution duly signed by the Chairman/ Secretary in
Format 3.

17.15 Additional documents-information to be submitted at the time of Scrutiny Committee for
Approval of MBA/PGDM (IEV) course

Additional documents-information to be submitted for MBA/PGDM (IEV) course as per the format
available in AICTE Website at www.aicte-india.org

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 207 ---
APPENDIX-18

Recommended Composition of Board of Governors
(BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) ofthe Technical
Institutions

a.

The Governing Body shall have at least eleven members including the Chairman and the
Member Secretary. The Registered Trust/ Society/ Company shall nominate six members
including the Chairman and the Member Secretary, and the remaining five members shall be
nominated as indicated below.

Chairman to be nominated by the Government/ Registered Trust/ Society/ Company. The
Chairman of the Governing Body shall preferably be a technical person either Entrepreneur or
an Industrialist or an Educationist of repute who is interested in the development of Technical
Education and has demonstrated an interest in promotion of quality Education.

Two to five Members (Industrialist/ Technologist/ Educationist) to be nominated by the
Registered Trust/ Society/Company.

Nominee of the affiliating University/ Board (Not applicable to PGDM Institutions).

Nominee of the All India Council for Technical Education (Ex-officio) (Applicable to PGDM
Institutions Only).

Nominee of the State Government/ UT(Ex-officio).

An Industrialist/ Technologist/ Educationist from the Region nominated by the State
Government/UT.

Principal/Director of the concerned Technical Institution (as nominee of the Trust/Society/
Company) —- Member Secretary.

Two Faculty members to be nominated from amongst the Regular Staff, one at the Level of
Professor and one at the Level of Associate Professor/Assistant Professor.

The number of members can be increased equally by adding nominees of the registered Society
and by adding an equal number of Education is from the Region keeping in view the interest
of the Technical Institution. The total number of members of a Governing Body, however, shall
not exceed 21.

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 172 |
--- Page 208 ---
APPENDIX-19
Academic Calendar 2022-23

Event for Technical Institutions (Not applicable for Stand alone

PGDM / PGCM Institutions)

Last Date for Grant of Approval to Technical Institutions

Schedule for
A/Y2022-23

10% July, 2022

1

Students

Last Date for Grant/ Refusal of Approval to Standalone PGDM/PGCM
Institutions

2 Last Date for Grant of Approval after appeal 30" July, 2022

3 | Last Date for Grant of Affiliation by University/Board 31% August, 2022

4 | Last Date for Commencement of Classes for Existing Students of 15‘ September, 2022
Technical Courses

5 | Commencement of induction program for 1* year students 10 October, 2022

6 Last Date for Cancellation of Seats for Technical Courses with FULL 20' October, 2022
Fee Refund

7 Last Date upto which First Year Students can be Admitted Against Vacancies | 25‘ October, 2022

8 Last Date for Commencement of Classes for First Year Students of Technical Courses) 25'* October, 2022

9 | Last Datefor Lateral Entry Admission to Second Year Courses for NewlyAdmitted| 30‘ October, 2022

Events for Standalone PGDM/PGCM Institutions

10 July, 2022

Last Date for Grant of Approval to Institutions Offering ODL/Online Course(s)

2 Final Date for Grant of Approval after appeal 30" July, 2022

3 Standalone Technical Institutions conducting PGDM/PGCM courses 1% April, 2022
shall NOT initiate the admission before

4 Last Date for Cancellation of Admission for Coursesin PGDM/PGCM 13" September, 2022
Institutions including FULL Fee Refund

5 Last Date for Admission to courses in PGDM/PGCM Institutions 20" September, 2022

Events for Institutions with ODL/Online Programme(s) / Course(s)

As per UGC policy

2 Last Date for Admission to Courses in Open and Distance Learning/Online
Learning Mode (First Session) (Except PGDM/
PGCM)
3 Last Date for Admission to Coursesin Open and Distance Learning/Online
Learning Mode (Second Session)
NOTE:

+ All the AICTE Approved Institutions / Universities are requested to follow AICTE / UGC Guidelines on
Examinations issued from time to time in view of Pandemic.

+ The Classes may be started in Online/Offline (Class Room) or Blended mode (Online as well as Offline)
following the prescribed protocols / guidelines related to Pandemic.

+ AICTE will not seek the change in last date of Approval & University will not seek the change in last date of
affiliation.

+ In case exigency arises due to pandemic situation AICTE is permitted to change the other dates in the
Academic Calendar 2022-2023, as per guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health / Ministry of Home/
Ministry of Education from time to time.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 209 ---
APPENDIX-20

Fellow Programme in Management: Conduct and
Admission Procedure

20.1 Admission Eligibility of Students

a. Master’s Degree or equivalent in Engineering and Technology/ Management/ Economics/
Social Science/ Biological Science/ Pure Science/ Commerce/ Humanities with FIRST CLASS
shall be considered for admission to Fellow Programme.

b. Those appearing for their final examination in the respective discipline can also apply. Such
students if selected shall be provisionally admitted provided they complete all requirements in
obtaining their Master’s Degree before 30th September of the year of admission. The admission
of these candidates shall remain provisional until they produce the mark sheet proving that
they satisfy the eligibility criteria. The deadline for submitting the final year mark sheet is
31%t December.

20.2 Admission Procedure

a. Admission to the Fellow Programme shall normally be made once a year, coinciding with that
of AICTE approved Post Graduate Diploma in Management or equivalent Degree/ Diploma.
Accordingly, the advertisement shall be made along with such Post Graduate Degree/ Diploma.

b. Application Procedure

The application shall be made in the prescribed form available with the Institution. Attested
copies of all the necessary Certificates and testimonials are to be attached with the applications.
The candidate must submit an abstract of about 5000 words on the area of research interest
(tentative research proposal) along with his/ her application.

c Selection Criteria

Selection for the Fellow Programme in the Institutions approved by AICTE for the Fellow
Programme shall be on the basis of the following criteria:

+ Academic qualifications and work experience
+ Tentative research proposal and its presentation before the Selection Committee

. Personal interview

d. The decision of the Institution Selection Committee regarding admission shall be final.
Communication shall be sent only to the selected candidates. The Institution shall not entertain
any queries or correspondence in respect of those not selected.

e. Approved Institution to conduct Fellow Programme in Management can admit only maximum
of 20 candidates in each Academic Year after ensuring availability of the Guide as per AICTE
Norms/Standards.

20.3 Research Guidance
a. Selection of Guide(s)

Each candidate shall have one/ two Guide(s) under whose supervision the research work in
relation to the Programme shall be carried out. The Guide(s) shall be nominated by the Director
of the Institution. All Guides shall be internal. In exceptional cases, where external guidance
shall be required, recognized Guides from reputed Institutions shall be allowed as co-guides
with the permission of AICTE. Research Guides shall be allotted to the selected candidates after
completion of the necessary course work and related formalities. The research Programme and
areas of research shall be finalized by respective Guides after discussion with the candidates
and should be forwarded to the Director for concurrence.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 174 |
--- Page 210 ---
b. Faculty with Ph.D and with at least 2 publications in recent times (within 3 years) in high quality
journals of repute are eligible to Guide the Fellow Programme candidates. Each such Faculty
shall be assigned a maximum of 2 candidates in each admission year.

« Absence of Guide during the Programme

In Case of temporary absence of a Guide for a period of more than one year a new Guide shall
be nominated for the Fellow Candidates. In case of a Guide who has guided for more than a
year, he/ she shall be allowed to resume the guidance after his/ her return from temporary
absence.

If the period of absence is less than 2 years, the pervious Guide shall act as Co-Guide on his/
her return. If the period of absence is more than 2 years he/she shall cease to be a Guide for the
Fellow candidate.

d. Change of Guide

Change of a Guide shall be permitted in exceptional circumstances on the recommendation of
the Director.

e. Number of Research Fellows per Guide
At any given time, the number of Research Fellows working with a Guide shall not exceed five.
f. Research Advisory Committee

The Director shall nominate a Research Advisory Committee for each Fellow based on the
recommendation of the Guide(s).

20.4 Course Study/ Credit Requirements

In partial fulfilment of the requirement of the Fellow Programme, a minimum number of Course credits
are required to be earned as prescribed below

a. Credit Requirement
Particular Code No. Course Title Credits
Module 1 FPO1 Research Methodology 3
FPO2 Managerial Statistics 3
FPO3 General Management 3
FP04 System Approach to Management 3
Module 2 FPO5 3 Stream specific Course of 3 credits each 9
FP06 Credit Seminar (General) 3
Module 3 FPO7 Credit Seminar (Specific) 3
FP08 Review paper based on the literature on theThesis related topic 3
Total Credits 30
b. Details of Courses and Seminar

The stream specific Courses and Seminars shall be decided as approved by the Director on the
recommendation by the candidate's Guide(s) and the Research Advisory Committee.

c Duration for earning Credit

All the credits specified above shall be earned within a maximum of three years from the date of
admission to the Programme. Extension after the three years shall be approved by the Director
for a period of one year with a review of progress every six months. Final approval shall be
given by the Director of the Institution.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 211 ---
20.5

20.6

Credit Course Requirement

A research scholar shall undergo 4 Courses of the total 12 credits in the first module and during
the second module he/ she shall undergo three streams-specific Courses of 9 credits and give
three credit Seminar on general management topic in the third module, the candidate shall
give three credits Seminar and write a review paper on the literature related to his/ her research
topic for publication purpose of 3 credits. Thus a candidate shall earn 12 credits in the first and
second module and 6 credits in the third module together adding up to 30 credits in all.

Grading System of Credit Courses/Seminar

The minimum of CGPA of 6.5 ona 10 point scale or 60% is required for passing Course/ Seminar.
A candidate getting less than 60% shall be given one more opportunity to repeat the Course/
Seminar. If he/ she still does not pass in the Course/ Seminar, he/ she shall be terminated from
the Fellow Programme.

Registration Seminar and Progress Seminar

Each research scholar needs to register his/ her research proposal. The registration procedure is given

below.

a.

Pre-registration Seminar

Each research scholar shall give a pre-registration Seminar before a Committee constituted by
the Director. The Committee shall include the Guide(s), experts drawn from Institution's Faculty
members and Director. The Seminar shall be given after completion of the three modules. The
Research Scholar shall submit 5 copies of the pre-registration Report (in about 15-20 pages) 15
days before the date of the Seminar. The Report shall include the proposed title of the Thesis,
are and frame work of the proposed research objectives, scope of the study, hypothesis if any,
and methodology to be followed. This stage is considered to be very important for screening
the candidate for further progress in the Programme. In case the research scholar fails to
defend his/her Thesis proposal successfully, he/she shall be allowed to resubmit the modified
research proposal as suggested by the above mentioned Committee. He/ she needs to give a
fresh Seminar based on the modified research proposal and in case he or she fails to defend it
in the second time, the research scholar shall be terminated from the Programme.

Application for registration

A candidate must apply for formal registration within one month after successful completion
of the pre-registration Seminar. The application for registration to be made in a prescribed
form and shall be accompanied by the following:

Title and summary of the Thesis proposal approved by the Guide(s)
Registration Fee of =2500/-

Effective Date of Registration

The registration shall be effective from the date of application for the registration.

Duration of the Programme

a.

Time Limit
A Candidate shall submit his/ her Thesis only after a minimum period of two years after

registration. However, the maximum period allowed for the submission of the Thesis is five
years from the date of admission to the Programme.

If a candidate fails to submit the Thesis within the prescribed upper time limit due to reasons
beyond his/her control, he/she shall apply to the Director for an extension .If the Institution is
satisfied with the candidate's justification, the Director shall permit him/her to re-register to the
Programme subject to the payment of re-registration Fee. This re-registration shall, however,
be effective only for a period of two years beyond which no extension shall be permitted.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 212 ---
b. Break or Unauthorized absence from the Programme

Any break or unauthorized absence from the Programme before registration shall lead to the
cancellation of admission. Any authorized break or leave of absence shall not be counted for
the minimum period of 2 years stipulated for submission of Thesis but shall be counted in the
maximum period of 5 years permissible for submission of the Thesis.

20.7. Submission and Evaluation of the Synopsis and Thesis
a. Pre-Synopsis Seminar

Every research scholar before submission of his/ her Thesis must give pre-Synopsis Seminar at
the Institution. The procedure for the pre-Synopsis Seminar is as follows:
Submission of 5 copies of the pre-Synopsis Report (not more than 40pages). The Report

shall include the focus and the summary of the Thesis. Highlighting his/ her own
contribution, details of the methodology, results, analysis, conclusions, limitations and

scope for future research. It is to be submitted through the Guide(s).

For seeking the approval, the candidate shall present pre-Synopsis Seminar before the
Committee consisting of Director, Guide(s) and two Faculty experts in the relevant area of
research. An outside expert, having expertise in the area of research shall be included in
the Committee

The Committee shall judge the work with regard to its accept ability and suggest
modification or elaboration of the work, if necessary, after incorporating the suggested
changes/ modifications to the satisfaction of the Committee, an abridged version of the
same in about 15-70 pages shall be submitted as Synopsis for the purpose of sending it to
prospective examiners.

b. Submission of the Synopsis

Five copies of the Synopsis with necessary modification incorporated shall be submitted within
a period of one month from the date of the pre-Synopsis Seminar to the Institution with a
Certificate by candidate and the Guide(s) stating:

That there is a prima facie case for consideration of the Thesis;

That the work does not include any work which has at any time previously been submitted
for an award of Fellow in Management or other equivalent Degree.

c Selection of Examiners

On receipt of Synopsis, the Director shall draw up a list of 6 possible examiners of the Thesis in
consultation with the Research Advisory Committee and Guide(s). The examiners shall be from
outside Institution, one from India and one from abroad, having good academic and research
standing in the field. Two examiners shall be selected by the Director from the list.

d. Submission of Thesis

The Thesis shall be submitted in six type written/ printed copies and a soft copy with necessary
Certificates and clearance with in a period of 6 months from the date of submission of the
Synopsis. An examination Fee of ¥25000/- which includes an honorarium of US$250/- for
foreign examiner and %5000/- Indian Examiner must be paid along with the Thesis submission.

e. Recommendations of the Examiners

A critical review and evaluation of the quality and extent of the work of the candidate as
embodied in the Thesis.

A definite recommendation as to whether the Thesis is of a sufficient standard and suitable
for the award of Fellow in Management : and

If the examiner is not in a position to make definite recommendation for the award of
the’Fellow in Management’, He/ She shall indicate the required modification/ revision
involving rewriting of Chapters but not involving further research work OR Complete
rewriting of the Thesis with an additional research work reinterpretation of Data.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 213 ---
20.8

20.9

Acceptance/ Rejection of Thesis

The Thesis shall be accepted if all the examiners make positive recommendations. If
recommendations for rejection or inconclusive recommendations are made by anyone of the
examiner, Director shall refer the Thesis to another examiner or examiners(s) from the panel. If
such a panel of examiner(s) rejects the Thesis, it shall stand rejected.

Re-submission of the Thesis

A Thesis which needs modification/ revision shall be resubmitted after revision within a period
of one year. Rejection of the Thesis after re-submission shall normally disqualify the candidate
of further consideration for the award of the Fellow in Management.

Viva-Voce

On acceptance of the Thesis, the Director shall appoint a panel of examiners to conduct a viva-
voce examination and open defense at which the candidate shall be required to defend his/
her Thesis. The panel of examiners shall consist of:

. The Chairman, Dean (Academic or Research) or his/ her nominee not below the rank of
Professor of the Institution nominated by the Director

. The Guide(s)
+ Indian External Examiner who examined the Thesis and accepted it.
The panel of Examiners shall submit their Report to the Director of the Institution.

If a Thesis has been accepted, but the candidate fails to defend it successfully at the Vice-voce
examination, he/ she shall reappear for the viva-voce examination within six months.

Award of Fellow in Management

On successful completion of the viva-voce and on the recommendations of the Institution’s Governing
Board, the Institution shall award “Fellow in Management’ to the Research scholar. The title of the Thesis
shall be mentioned in the Certificate of award.

General Regulations

Candidate must furnish a periodical Report of progress of the Course work and research work
for consideration of Institution, Research Advisory Committee and the Guide(s). Unsatisfactory
progress in research shall render the candidate terminated from the Programme.

The candidate shall pay all the prescribed Fee as and when they fall due.

The Courses prescribed, but not successfully completed by the candidate shall be reconsidered
by the Director. Research Advisory Committee shall suggest alternative Course(s) depending
upon the relevance of the Course(s) to the research work of candidate.

The research scholar shall face automatic disqualification and termination from the Programme,
if he/ she is found to be admitted to any other equivalent Degree Level Programme.

The Council reserves the right to amend, modify or change Regulations as may be necessary,
from time to time. All such changes shall be binding on the research scholar in the Institution.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 214 ---
AFFIDAVIT-1

Forgotten Password

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary,<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ....., aged....., resident
of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to the following in connection with my/our request to
AICTE for new password to our Institution <Name and address of Institution>,

1. I/We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook;
2. That I/We have forgotten/ misplaced the password for our <user ID>;

3. That I/We<Name>,Chairman/Secretary,<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, authorised to submit the
present request and there is no misrepresentation;

4. That I/ We <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> have made an online
payment of %5000/- vide Transaction ID..... date.....;

5. That the new login credentials are to be sent to <Name of the Person>, <Address>, <Landline No>, <Mobile
No>, <email id>; and

6. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed there from.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)

(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

\/ We, the above named deponent do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 215 ---
AFFIDAVIT-2

For the applications submitted under Chapter I/II/IV
(except Closure of the Institution)

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ..... aged..... years and,
resident of ....., in connection with our application dated ..... made to AICTE for, (retain items in the list below
as applicable)1.1/ We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook;

Do here by solemnly affirm, state and declare as under:

1. That the information given by <Name(s)>in the application made to AICTE is true and complete. Nothing
is false and no information/ material has been concealed;

2. That the Institution is functioning in the location as approved by the Council;

3. That the Institution has uploaded the Occupancy/Completion Certificate/Building License/Form D issued
by the Competent Authority and the Structural Stability Certificate by the Competent Authority;

4. That the Trust/ Society/ Company runs the following other Institutions in the same Campus; Total Built-Up
Are available

Name of the Institution Programmes/ Courses Built-Up Area Approved by AICTE or Not

offered

5. That the Institution has uploaded valid Fire Safety Certificate issued by the Competent Authority;
6. That Principal of the Institution is regular and qualified as per AICTE norms;

7. That the Faculty norms as well as Faculty: Student ratio is maintained as per Approval Process Handbook
and the Faculty data uploaded is true and complete;

8. That the Institution has fulfilled the norms for Faculty and Infrastructural facilities for Reinstatement of
“Reduction in Intake’;

9. That the Promoter/ Institution has not demanded/ retained the Original Degree Certificates from the
Faculty members;

10. That the declaration, information and documents submitted/uploaded as per Appendix16/17 of the
Approval Process Handbook with regard to Land, Built-up area (Instructional area, Administrative area
and Amenities area) and other Infrastructure therein where the letter of approval/ Extension of Approval
is sought for < Name of the Institution>is true, complete and nothing is false;

11. Thatthe Landis contiguous, there is no dispute pertaining to the said Land andis free from all encumbrances;

12. That if any of the information is found to be false, incomplete, misleading and/ or that the<Name(s)>fail(s)
to disclose all the information and/ or suppress any information and/ or misrepresent the information, the
Council shall also be free to take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval and/or any other action as
deemed fit against the <Name(s)> and others as the case may be and/ or the individuals associated with
the Trust/ Society/ Company and/ or the Institution;

13. That the Land/Built-up area details given below in the Table are true and complete;

<Reproduce only appropriate section(s) related to application in the table below>

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 216 ---
Sl. Nameofthe Document Date of PlotNo. Address (Village) Areain Acre
No. Deed Holder No. Registration District

Total area in Acre

Room No. Room type Carpet Completion Completion Completion of Electrification
(mention Class area(in  ofFlooring of Walls and and lighting
Room/Laboratory/ m2) painting
Toilet, etc.)

14. That | have submitted/uploaded all the additional documents/information regarding resolution/ NOC’s/
Certificates/ details of Building completion (partial/full) in AICTE Web-Portal in respect of our application
(as applicable) and the same is true and complete;

15. That | have uploaded the details of faculties, Administrative and support Staff and also have uploaded the
latest salary sheet with details such as pay scale, gross pay, PF deduction and TDS, the same is true and
complete;

16. That | have uploaded all the student data of the previous year and the same is true and complete;
17. That no students have been admitted without the approval of concerned regulatory bodies
18. That the financial transactions have been done only by digital payment;

19. That the declaration, information and documents pertaining to the availability of Faculty and adhering
to the timing for Second Shift (if applicable) is true and complete. Nothing is false and no information/
material has been concealed;

20. That liabilities, if any, arise out of the Conversion of Women’s Institution into Co-ed Institution and vice-
versa/Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level Institution shall solely be that of <Name of the Trust/
Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;

21. That liabilities, if any, arise out of Change of Site/ Location shall solely be that of <Name of Trust/ Society/
Company/ Technical Institution>;

22. That liabilities if any, arise out of Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction
in Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s)/ Change of affiliating University/ Board shall solely be that
of < Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;

23. That admission to NRI/Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries/ Collaboration and
Fellow Programme shall be strictly within the limit and shall be done on Merit basis and liability, if any,
arise out of the same shall solely be that of<Name of the Trust/Society/ Company/ Technical Institution>;

24. That Audited statement of accounts of the Trust/Society/Company for the previous year has been uploaded;

25. That all Faculty and all non-teaching Staff data and all student data of all years and all Course(s), as entered
by the Head of the Institution as per the prescribed Format on the Web-Portal are correct;

26. That the hostel facilities of International Standards for NRI/Foreign Nationals/ Children of Indian workers in
Gulf Countries/Collaboration and established an Office and Student Counsellor to take care of the issues of
such students admitted are provided. Further, their entry and exit shall be adhered to the norms specified
under Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India;

27. That the Sports facilities are provided to the students;

28. That the Internal Quality Assurance Cell as per Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook before
commencement of the Academic Session 2021-22 in respect of <application number><Name and address
of Institution> is constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/ will be constituted (in case of new Technical
Institutions);

29. That the following Committees as per Appendix 6 of the Approval Process Handbook before
commencement of the Academic Session 2021-22 in respect of<application number><Name and address
of Institution>are constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/will be constituted (in case of new Technical
Institutions); and

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 217 ---
Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education notified
Regulation for prevention and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide
No. 37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated 01.07.2009)

Establishment of Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment of OMBUDSMAN
by the University. (As per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students)
Regulation, 2019 vide F.No.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019)

Establishment of Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) (As per Section 4 All India Council for Technical
Education (Gender Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women
Employees and Students and Redressal of Grievances in Technical Institutions) Regulations, 2016

Establishment of Committee for SC/ ST (As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 OF 1989, dated11.09.1989)

30. That, the Institutions uploaded the Annual Report of ICC in the AICTE Web-Portal.

31. That, the Institution undertakes to submit that all the employments in the Institution shall be as per the
norms of the existing Labour Law and the payments shall be as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages
Act of State/ Central Government.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)

(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 218 ---
AFFIDAVIT-3

Forsubmitting the Security Deposit
(Upon establishment of New Technical Institution /New Programme / New Level)

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ....., aged ....., resident
of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/
our application <application number> to AICTE for the establishment of Institution<Name and address of
proposed Institution>,

1. That in accordance with the norms, procedures and conditions prescribed by AICTE, an amount of =
se eeee ceases eenes was deposited by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> in AICTE’s account, for a
period of 10 years;

2. That the interest accrued on the deposit shall be retained by AICTE and used for improving the quality of
Technical Education;

3. That AICTE in its discretion shall extend the term of the deposit fora further period and/or forfeit the amount
for violation of norms, conditions and requirements prescribed by AICTE and/ or non- performance by the
Institution and/ or Closure of the Institution due to withdrawal of AICTE approval or for any other reason.
In an event of forfeiture, the proceeds of the fixed deposit shall be utilized for meeting the expenditure
towards refunds to the students and others;

4. Thatall remaining requirements as mentioned under the Regulations and the Approval Process Handbook,
as applicable, by <Name and address of proposed Institution>shall be complied within one month from
the date of issuance of the approval letter;

5. That the Land measuring Acre, on which <Name of the proposed Institution>is located was not mortgaged
for any purpose to any Institution on the date of filing the application and that status is continuing till date
and shall continue till the date of issuance of the letter of approval (Not applicable for New Programme /
New Level);

6. In the event of Non-Compliance by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>and/ or<Name of the
proposed Institution>with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event
of violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action,
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise
out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the (Society/ Institution); and

7. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

| 183 | AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 219 ---
AFFIDAVIT-4

For the Progressive/Complete Closure of the Institution

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.
I/We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ....., aged....., resident of
.++, do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/ our
application <application number> to AICTE for the Progressive/ Complete Closure of our Institution <Name
and address of Institution>,
Do here by solemnly affirm, state and declare as under:

1. That ourTrust <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> vide resolution. ..Resolved for closing the Institution
and has applied for Closure of <Name and address of Institution> in the Web-Portal and had paid the
requisite Fee as per AICTE norms;

2. That liabilities, if any, arise out of Closure of <Name and address of Institution> shall be solely that of
<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>;

3. That <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> undertakes that no further admission of students shall be
made in the current and forthcoming years;

4. That <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> undertakes to provide all the facilities to the existing students
till they pass out;

5. That have submitted/ uploaded all the additional documents/ information regarding resolution/ NOC’s/
Certificates in AICTE Web-Portal in respect of our application (as applicable) and the same is true and
complete;

6. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed there from; and

7. That the FDR was neither mortgaged nor encashed.
Details of RPGF/ Joint FDR

Details of the RPGF/ Joint Nameand Address Dateof Amount FDR No./Online Date of

FDR/ RTGS of the Bank Issue (®) Transaction No. Maturity

Details of RPGF/ Joint FDR/
RTGS made with AICTE/
Board for the establishment
of the Institution

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 184 |
--- Page 220 ---
AFFIDAVIT-5

For the compliance of AICTE norms

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/We, <Name>, Vice Chancellor/ Registrar, <Name of the University>, son of ..... aged ..... years and, resident of
...., iN connection with our application dated ..... made to AICTE for,

Do here by solemnly affirm, state and declare as under:

1. That the <Name> University is fulfilling AICTE norms as specified in the Approval Process Handbook. If any
complaint arises, AICTE has the right to inspect the premises and if the complaint is found to be true, the
Council shall take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval.

2. That the information given by <Name of the University>in the application made to AICTE is true and
complete. Nothing is false and no information/ material has been concealed.

3. That if any of the information is found to be false, incomplete, misleading and/ or that the<Name of the
University>fail(s) to disclose all the information and/ or suppress any information and/ or misrepresent the
information, the Council shall take any action, including Withdrawal of Approval.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

\/ We, the above named deponent do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

| 185 | AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 221 ---
AFFIDAVIT-6

For the Release of Security Deposit

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/We, <Name, Chairman/ Secretary <Name of Trust/ Society/ Company, Son of .....aged ..... Resident of .....Do
hereby state on the affirmation that Institution viz., ..... had created Cumulative Fixed Deposit Receipt No. .....
Dated for &..... for the maturity period of 8 years from ......... to... in the joint name of the Secretary, <Name
of the Trust and the Regional Officer, ....., AICTE,

.... Maturity of said FDR deposited towards ..... Programme was due on <date > Or

I/ We, <Name, Chairman/ Secretary <Name of Trust/ Society/ Company, Son of ..... aged..... Resident of .....
Do hereby state on the affirmation that Institution viz., ..... had created a Security Deposit with a transaction
number.....on ..... for %..... fora period of 10 years from ..... to..... with AICTE towards ..... Programme

|, hereby state on affirmation that

1. No cognizable action is pending against the Institution;

All the conditions of LoA have been fulfiled by the Institution;
The Institution is functioning at its approved permanent site;
The Institution is not operating on a temporary site;

The Institution has not been put under no admission category;
No inquiry is pending against the Institution;

No adverse action is being contemplated against the Institution;

No Fee refund case is pending in the Institution;

ep On nMN FF WN

No ragging case/ sexual harassment against Women has occurred in the Institution;

oO

. No Complaint is pending under investigation relating to misappropriation/ defalcation/ embezzlement of
money by the Institution/ Trust/ Society/ Company; and

=

. The said FDR was not mortgaged/ renewed (not applicable to RTGS).
Further, in case if any violation is found, the Security Deposit will be resubmitted to AICTE by the Trust.
Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above name deponent do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the Place> on this the <date.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(Seal)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.
(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 186 |
--- Page 222 ---
AFFIDAVIT-7

For transfer of private Property / Building
(under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882)

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

/ We, <name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <name of the Society/ Trust/Company>, son of ......... aged
ce ceeeeeeeee sees , resident of ........, (Lessor) do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to hand over the
possession of my/ our Property/ Building No... (detailed address of the Property/ Building ) to (Lessee),
<name>, Chairman/ Secretary,<name of the Trust/Society/Company>, to run a Technical Institution (name and
address ) as under:-

1. I/We will abide by all the provisions contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 or any other Law for the
time being in force relating to transfer of Property/ Building to or by Companies, Associations or bodies of
individuals while transferring the aforesaid Property/ Building to the Lessee;

2. That there are no legal issues pending with regard to this property before any court of Law hampering the
transfer of this Property/ Building to the Lessee;

3. That the lease of Property/ Building is irrevocable for 30 years of which 25 years us still live;

4. That there are no financial liabilities against this Property/ Building before transfer of the same to the
Lessee;

5. That the Property/ Building is free from all encumbrances;

6. That both the Lessor and Lessee shall abide by the Local Municipal Laws and other Laws of the Land
relating to this Property/ Building;

7. That the Lessee shall not have any right to sub-lease this Property/ Building to any other entity/person;

8. That henceforth, the Lessee shall be liable to pay all the taxes of this Property/ Building under the different
Local Municipal Laws and other Laws of the Land; and

9. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material
has been concealed there from.

Names of both the parties (Lessor and Lessee) or their authorized persons executing the undertaking.
LESSOR
LESSEE
DEPONENT(S)

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at < name of the place> on this the <date>.
LESSOR
LESSEE
DEPONENTS
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponents on this - day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

| AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 223 ---
AFFIDAVIT-8

For Additional Course/ Increase in Intake

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, son of ....., aged ....., resident
of....., do here by solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/
our application <application number> to AICTE for the additional Course/ increase in intake of our Institution
<Name and address of Institution>,

1. That our Trust <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>vide resolution Resolved to apply for additional
Course/ increase in intake in our Institution <Name and address of Institution> in the Web-Portal and had
paid the requisite TER Charges as per AICTE norms;

2. That we have created all the additional facilities such as Infrastructure, hostel (wherever applicable) Faculty
etc. for meeting the additional Course/increase in the Intake.

3. That liabilities, if any, arise out of additional Course/ increase in the Intake of <Name and address of
Institution> shall be solely that of <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>; and

4. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed therefrom.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this - day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 188 |
--- Page 224 ---
AFFIDAVIT-9

For Change in the Name of the Bank

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ....., aged ....., resident of
...«, do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/ our
application <application number> to AICTE for change in the Name of the Bank of our Institution <Name and
address of Institution>,

1. I/We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook;

2. That there is no commercial or business angle for change of <Name of the old Bank> to < Name of the new
Bank>;

3. That in the event of Non-Compliance by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> and/ or <Name of
the proposed Institution> with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event
of violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise
out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Institution;

4. That there are no legal issues pending with both old and new Banks;
5. That there are no financial liabilities in the <Name of the old Bank>;

6. That liabilities, if any, arise out of change of Name of the Bank shall be solely that of the <Name of the Trust/
Society/ Company>; and

7. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed there from.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

\/ We, the above named deponent do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 225 ---
AFFIDAVIT-10

For Change in the Name / Address of the Trust / Society / Company

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>, son of ....., aged ....., resident
of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/
our application <application number> to AICTE for change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company of our
Institution <Name and address of Institution>,

1. I/We will abide by all terms and conditions as laid down in the Approval Process Handbook;

2. That there is no commercial or business angle for change of <Name of the old Trust/ Society/ Company>
to < Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company>;

3. That in the event of Non-Compliance by the <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> and/ or <Name of
the proposed Institution> with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event
of violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities arise
out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the Trust/ Society/ Company/ Institution;

That there are no legal issues pending with both old and new Trust/ Society/ Company;
That there are no financial liabilities in the old Trust/ Society/ Company Name;

That the Land and Building are in the Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company;

NX WwW Ss

That liabilities, if any, arise out of change of Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company shall be solely that of
new <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>; and

8. That the facts stated in this affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed there from.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

\/ We, the above named deponent do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL) DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 190 |
--- Page 226 ---
AFFIDAVIT-11

For Collaboration and Twinning Programme

(Between Foreign University / Institution OR Institute of National Importance / Eminence of
India and AICTE Approved Institution)

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.
I/We, <Name>, son of.....,aged ....., resident of ....., do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply
with the following in connection with my/ our application <application number> for Collaboration and

Twinning Programme between Foreign University/ Institution <Name and address of Institution> and AICTE
Approved Institution in India <Name and address of Institution>

1. That the Degree/Diploma and post Diploma awarded to the students in India shall be recognized in the
Parent Country and shall be treated equivalent to the corresponding Degrees/Diploma and post Diploma
awarded by the University /Institution in<Country of origin of University/Foreign Institution>;

2. That the Institution for which application for approval is being made shall offer Programme(s) and Course(s)
approved by the Council;

3. That the Institution for which application for approval is being made shall admit students as per Intake
approved by the Council;

4. That the Institution for which application for approval is being made shall charge Fee as approved by the
Council;

5. University/ Institution shall declare the detailed guidelines for admission, entry Level qualifications, Fee
of all kinds, the examination and evaluation and award of degree that there shall not be major deviations
with the prescribed procedures in their Parent Country, vis-vis India;

6. That the students admitted under the Twinning Programme will spend at least one Semester for the two
years Programme and two Semesters for four years Programme in the Foreign University/ Institution in its
Parent Country;

7. That admission to Collaboration and Twinning Programme shall be strictly within the limit and shall be
done on Merit basis and liability, if any, arise out of the same shall solely be that of<Name of the Trust/
Society/ Company/ Technical institution>;

8. That MoU is executed as required which shall provide for those students who fail to get VISA to be
accommodated in the local affiliating University/ Institution to continue his/ her Education; and

9. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed the reform.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/ our
knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.
(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)
Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this- day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 227 ---
AFFIDAVIT-12

For Conducting Academic Course(s)of other Regulatory Bodies

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, son of ....., aged .....,resident
of.....,do hereby solemnly affirm, state and undertake to comply with the following in connection with my/
our application <application number> to AICTE for conducting academic Course(s) of other Regulatory Body

1. That our Trust <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>vide resolution Resolved to conduct academic
Course(s) of other Regulatory Body and had paid the requisite TER Charges as per AICTE norms;

2. The Institution(s) approved by AICTE in the Campus has/ have all the facilities such as Infrastructure,
hostel (if applicable), Faculty, etc. for meeting the ALL the Courses, in addition to the proposed academic
Course(s).

3. That we are using the excess facilities available / have created all the additional facilities such as ........ for
meeting the requirements of academic Course(s);

4. That liabilities, if any, arise out of academic Course(s) shall be solely that of <Name of the Trust/ Society/
Company>;and

5. That the facts stated in this Affidavit are true to my/ our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no
material has been concealed there from.

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this - day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 192 |
--- Page 228 ---
AFFIDAVIT-13

For Conducting Open and Distance Learning (ODL) / Online Learning Mode

Institute shall download portal generated common affidavit as per application. The same should be printed
on Non-Judicial Stamp Paper/ E-Stamp Paper of =100/- and upload over portal after duly Sworn before a
First Class Judicial Magistrate or Notary or an Oath Commissioner.

I/ We, <Name>, Chairman/ Secretary, <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company, son of ....., aged.....,resident
of......doherebysolemnlyaffirm,stateandundertaketocomplywiththefollowinginconnectionwithmy/
ourapplication<applicationnumber>toAlCTEforconductingOpenandDistance Learning Courses / Online
Learning Mode Courses.

1. That the information given by in the application made to AICTE is true and complete. Nothing is false and
no information/ material has been concealed;

2. That the Institution Headquarters is functioning in the location as approved by the Council;

3. That the Trust/ Society/ Company runs the following other Institutions in the same Campus; Total Built-Up
Area available

Name of the Programmes/Courses Built-Up Approved by AICTE or Not

Institution offered Area

That the institution has appointed faculty members as per AICTE guidelines.
That the information provided regarding the Learner Support Centres are true and complete.

That the information provided regarding the Examination Centres are true and complete.

Naw Ss

That the following Committees as per Appendix 6 of Approval Process Handbook before commencement
of the Academic Session 2021-22 in respect of <application number> <Name and address of Institution>
are constituted (in case of existing Institutions)/ will be constituted (in case of new Technical Institutions);
and

Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee (As per All India Council for Technical Education notified
Regulation for prevention and prohibition of ragging in AICTE approved Technical Institutions vide No.
37-3/ Legal/ AICTE/ 2009 dated01.07.2009).

Establishment of Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment of OMBUDSMAN
by the University. (As per All India Council for Technical Education (Redressal of Grievance of Students)
Regulation ,2019 vide F.No.1-101/PGRC/AICTE/Regulation/2019 dated 07.11.2019)

Establishment of Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) (As per Section 4 All India Council for Technical
Education (Gender Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of Women
Employees and Students and Redressal of Grievances in Technical Institutions) Regulations, 2016.

Establishment of Committee for SC/ ST (As per the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, No. 33 OF 1989, dated 11.09.1989).

8. That, the Institution undertakes to submit that all the employments in the Institution shall be as per the
norms of the existing Labour Law and the payments shall be as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages
Act of State/ Central Government.

9. In the event of Non-Compliance by the<Name of the Trust/Society/Company>and/or<Name of the
proposed Institution> with regard to guidelines, norms and conditions prescribed, as also in the event
of violation of any of the undertaking mentioned herein, AICTE shall be free to take appropriate action,
including withdrawal of its approval without consideration of any related issues and that all liabilities
arising out of such withdrawal shall solely be that of the (Trust/ Society/ Company/Institution).

Name of the authorized person executing the undertaking along with his/ her Official Position)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 229 ---
VERIFICATION

I/We, the above named deponent(s) do hereby verify that the facts stated in the above Affidavit are true to my/
our knowledge. No part of the same is false and no material has been concealed there from.

Verified at <Name of the place> on this the <date>.

(Name, Designation and Address of the Executants)
(SEAL)
DEPONENT(s)

Solemnly affirmed and signed before me by the deponent on this - day of - month, year ... at my office.

(Judicial First Class Magistrate/ Notary Public/ Oath Commissioner)

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 4 |
--- Page 230 ---
CERTIFICATE-1

Certificate of an Advocate
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Advocate)

1. Certificate of an Advocate
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Advocate)

The copies of <Trust/ Society/ Company> registration documents, Land documents, Land use Certificate,
Land Conversion Certificate in respect of application submitted by <Name and address of the Applicant>
who is an Applicant for establishment of new Technical Institution offering Technical Education
Programme(s) were provided to me by<Name and address of the Applicant> for verification regarding
their authenticity and appropriateness.

A. Trust/ Society/ Company Registration Documents:

Registration Certificate No.

Date of Registration

Registered at

Registered under the Act

1. | have verified the above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration documents from the Office of
<Competent Authority>.

2. The above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration documents are/ are not registered at the Office of
<Competent Authority>.

3. The above-mentioned Trust/ Society/ Company registration Documents are/ are not authentic.

B. Land Documents:

Sl.No. |Name ofthe Deed |Document No. | Survey Registration No. | Land Areain Acre
Holder No. and Date

Total Area (in Acre)

| hereby certify that:

1. | have verified the above-mentioned Land documents from the Sub Registrar Office<place>.
. The above-mentioned Land documents are registered at the Sub Registrar Office<place>

. The above-mentioned Land documents are authentic.

The above-mentioned Land documents are in the name of the Applicant.

. The title of the Land pertaining to the above-mentioned Land documents are clear.

Xn nun KR WhN

. The Applicant is in Lawful possession of the Land pertaining to the above-mentioned Land documents.

Cc. Land Use Certificate:

Letter No.
Letter dated

Issued by
Extent of Land

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 231 ---
| hereby certify that:

1.

5.

The Competent Authority has issued the Land Use Certificate respect of Land under reference for the
proposed Institution mentioned above is.....

2. It has been approved by the Competent Authority.
3.
4

| verified the above-mentioned Land use Certificate from the Office of<Competent Authority>.

. The above-mentioned Land Use Certificate is authentic.

It has been issued for the full extent of Land.

D. Land Conversion Certificate:

Letter No.

Letter dated

Issued by

Extent of Land

| hereby certify that:

1.

wn BF WwW NY

The Competent Authority has issued the Land Conversion Certificate respect of Land under reference
for the proposed Institution mentioned above is.....

. Ithas been approved by the Competent Authority.
. |verified the above-mentioned Land Conversion Certificate from the Office of <Competent Authority>.
. The above-mentioned Land Conversion Certificate isauthentic.

. It has been issued for the full extent ofLand.

E. Land Classification Certificate:

Letter No.

Letter dated

Issued by

Land Classification

| hereby certify that:

1.

Date:

Place:

The Competent Authority has issued the Land Classification Certificate respect of Land under reference
for the proposed Institution mentioned above is.....

. Ithas been approved by the Competent Authority.

. | verified the above-mentioned Land Classification Certificate from the Office of <Competent

Authority>.

. The above-mentioned Land Classification Certificate is authentic.

. It has been issued for the full extent of Land.

Signature of the Advocate
Name of the Advocate ..... RegistrationNo. .....

Practicing at .....

Seal/ Stamp of the Advocate

*Strike off whichever is not applicable

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 6 |
--- Page 232 ---
CERTIFICATE-2

Certificate of an Architect Registered with Council of Architecture
(To be produced in the Letterhead of Architect)

The copies of the approved Site Plan and Building Plans in respect of application submitted by <Name and
address of the Applicant> who is an Applicant for establishment of new Technical Institution<Name of the
Institutions> at <address> were provided to me by <Name and address of the Applicant>for verification
regarding their authenticity and appropriateness.

Details of Site Plan and Building Plans

Plans approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval

| hereby certify that:

1. The Competent Authority has approved the site Plan and Building Plans of an Educational Institution at
the proposed site mentioned above is.....

2. Ihave verified the above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans from the Office of <Competent Authority>.
3. The above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans have been approved by the Competent Authority.
4. The above-mentioned site Plan and Building Plans are authentic.
5. Construction of Building admeasuring with the following details has been completed in all respects as per
the approved Building Plan.
SI. | Room Room type Carpet area | Completion | Completion Completion of
No. No (mention Class (in m2) of Flooring | of Walls and Electrification and

Room/ Laboratory/ painting lighting
Toilet, etc.)

Details of the Occupancy/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D

Certificate approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval

Structural Stability Certificate

Certificate approved by
Approval Number
Date of Approval

| hereby certify that:

1. The Competent Authority has approved the Occupancy/ Completion Certificate/ Building License/ Form D
and the Structural Stability Certificate, if applicable, mentioned above is.....

2. have verified the above-mentioned Certificates from the Office of <Competent Authority>.
3. The above-mentioned Certificates have been approved by the Competent Authority.

4. The above-mentioned Certificates are authentic.
Signature of the Architect

Name of the Architect ..... Registration No. .....
Date:
Place:
Seal/ Stamp of the Architect
*Strike off whichever is not applicable

| 1 AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 233 ---
CERTIFICATE-3

Certificate of the Bank Manager where the Applicant has a Bank
Account (To be produced in the Letterhead of Bank duly signed by the
Bank Manager)

The copies of documents pertaining to the funds position (operational) ie. the bank statement and/ or Fixed
Deposit Receipts in respect of application submitted by<Name and address of the Applicant>who is an
Applicant for establishment of new Technical Institution<Name of the Institution>at<address>) were provided
tome by <Nameand address of the Applicant>for verification regarding their authenticity and appropriateness.

A. Bank Statement

Name of the Account Holder

Account Number
Name and Address of the Bank

It is certified that,

i. | verified the above-mentioned bank account from the records of <Name and address of bank>.
ii. The above-mentioned bank account is in the Name of.....

iii. The above-mentioned bank account is/ is not authentic.

iv. The balance in the above-mentioned bank account as on today, i.e. <dd/ mm/ yyyy>is @.....

B. Fixed Deposits

SI. No. FDR Number Date of Date of Maturity | Amount Name and Address of
Deposit Bank

Total Amount

It is certified that,
1. | have verified the above-mentioned operational fund FDRs from our Branch/Bank.

2. The above-mentioned FDRs are/ are not in the name of the Applicant under reference mentioned
above.

3. The above-mentioned FDRs are/ are not authentic.

4. There are no loans or mortgage of FDRs

Signature of the Bank Manager
Name of the Bank Manager

Date:

Place:

Seal/ Stamp of the Bank Manager

*Strike off whichever is not applicable

AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 198 |
--- Page 234 ---
FORMAT-1

No Objection Certificate from the State Government/ UT
The<Name of the Trust/Society/Company>vide its Executive meeting held on
at ee vide item no.
have passed a resolution for the

i. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year

ii. Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address>,(new)

iii. Conversion of Women's Institutes intoCo-edInstitution/Co-edInstitution Women's Institution
iv. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
v. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme<Course1.....(Intake)> in the Institution

i. Closure of the Institution

<

<

ii. Change the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from <Name of the present Trust/ Society/ Company
> at <address> to <Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company > at<address>

<Name of the Institution>at<address>, Vide application ref. No.....Date: made by the Trust/Society/
Company Name ..... Address as at .....

This is to confirm that the <State Government/UT> has no objection for the Institution applied for
i. Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same premises in the same year

ii. Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address>,(new)

iii. Conversion of Women's Institutes intoCo-edInstitution/Co-edInstitution Women's Institution
iv. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/Degree Level into Diploma Level
v. Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme<Course1.....(Intake)> in the Institution

i. Closure of the Institution

<

<

ii. Change the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from <Name of the present Trust/ Society/ Company
> at <address> to <Name of the new Trust/ Society/ Company > at<address>

<Name of the Institution> at <address>.

Liabilities, if any, on this count shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant of the Trust/ Society/
Company and shall be settled as per the rules and Regulations as applicable.

Authorized Signatory
<State Government/ UT>

Note: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be
accepted *Strike off whichever is not applicable

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 235 ---
FORMAT-2

No Objection Certificate from the Affiliating University/ Board

The <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> vide its Executive meeting held on .....at ....vide item no.h ave
passed a resolution for the

vi.

vii.

viii.

xi.

xii.

xiii.

xiv.

XV.

xvi.

xvii.

xviii.

Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year

Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address>, (New)

Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution/Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution
Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
Starting of new Programme Level, Programme<Course1.....(Intake)> in the Institution

Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the Institution(s)> at <address>,
under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same Campus

Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course <Name of the Course>
Starting of New Course <Name of the Course>

Starting of Division in Indian Language <Name of the Course>
Closure of the Institution

Closing of MCA Course and Introduction of MBA/PGDM Course/Closing of MBA/PGDM Course and
Introduction of MCA Course

Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>

Conversion of Courses into allied Vocational Courses

Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)

Change in the Name of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address> to <Name of the
Institution> at <address>

Change in the Name of the affiliating University/ Board from <Name of the present University/ Board>
at <address> to <Name of the new University/ Board> at<address>

Change the Name of the Trust from <Name of the present Trust> at <address> to <Name of the new
Trust> at<address>

Starting of the Vocational Degree/Diploma Programme under NSQF

<Name of the Institution >at<address>, Vide application ref. No ......Date:...... made by the Trust/
Society/ Company Name ..... Address as at .....

This is to confirm that the<affiliating University/Board> ......... has no objection for the

i. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the
same premises in the same year

ii. Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old)
to<Name of the Institution>at<address>, (new)

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 236 ---
vi.

vii.

viii.

Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-ed Institution/ Co-ed Institution to Women’s
Institution

Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level
Starting of new Programme/ Level, Programme <Course1..... (Intake.....)> in the Institution

Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the

Institution(s)>at<address>, under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus/City

Introduction of Integrated Degree Course <Name of the Course>. Also it is confirmed that the
said Integrated Degree Course is available in the approved nomenclature of the University

Starting of new Course <Name of the Course>
Closure of the Institution, <Course1..... (Intake.....), Course2 .....(Intake.....),>
Mention Programme(s) and Course(s) where Closure of the Institution/ Programme is applied for:

Closing of MCA Course and Introduction of MBA/ PGDM Course/ Closing of MBA/ PGDM Course
and Introduction of MCA Course

Programme

Level

e-4 e-3 e-2 e-1 Current
Academic
Year

»
lon
a
Qa

o

Year of Establishment
Total No. of students
Institution as on date

studying in the

Course
Approved
Intake
Actual
Admission
Approved
Intake
Actual
Admission
Approved
Intake
Actual
Admission
Approved
Intake
Actual
Admission
Approved
Intake
Actual
Admission

xi.

xii.

xiii.

Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>

Conversion of Courses into allied Vocational Courses

Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)

Re-arrangement of current students/ students who were admitted in these Courses in the
previous years and who are trailing due to failures, etc. are mentioned in the following table:

Current Staff strength, re-arrangements and dues, if any, shall be settled as per existing norms
and Regulations on that behalf.

Course requested for | Number of Number of students admitted in these Details about re-

Closure

current students | Course(s) in the previous years and who are | arrangements of
trailing due to failures students

xiv.

XV.

xvi.

Change in the Name of the Institution from<Name of the Institution>at<address>to<Name of the
Institution>at<address>

Change in the Name of the affiliating University/ Board from <Name of the present University/
Board> at <address> to <Name of the new University/ Board> at<address>

Change in the Name of the Trust from <Name of the present Trust> at <address> to <Name of the
new Trust> at<address>

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 237 ---
xvii. Starting of the Vocational Degree/Diploma Programme under NSOF. Also, it is confirmed that the
said Vocational Degree/Diploma Programme under NSOF has been granted affiliation in year .....
and has been included in the approved nomenclature of the University.

<Name of the Institution> at <address>.

Liabilities if any, on this count shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant of the Trust/Society/
Company and shall be settled as per the rules and Regulations as applicable.

Registrar/ Director
<affiliating University/ Board >

Note: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be
accepted

*Strike off whichever is not applicable

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 238 ---
FORMAT-3

Resolution of the Trust/ Society/ Company

That the Trust/ Society/ Company vide its Executive meeting held on......... ati vide item no. have
resolved, for the

i. Establishment of new Technical Institution and apply to AICTE for approval to start<Name of the
Institution>to offer Technical Education in<Programme>and shall allocate, Land at <complete address
with survey numbers, plot numbers> measuring ............ Acre, earmarked for the proposed <Name of
the Technical Institution> at <full address> required funds for creation of carpet and Built-up area

ii. Institution applied for Closure of the Institution for starting of a new Technical Institution in the same
premises in the same year

iii. Introduction of NRIs in the following Programme(s)/Course(s)

iv. Change of Site/ Location of the Institution from <Name of the Institution>at<address>, (Old) to<Name
of the Institution>at<address>(new)v. Conversion of existing Women’s Institution into Co-ed
Institution/ Co-ed Institution to Women’s Institution in the Name of<proposed <Name of the Institution

vi. Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level/ Degree Level into Diploma Level

vii. Starting of new Programme Level, Programme(s)<Course1.....(Intake —)>

viii. | Merger of Institutions <Name of the Institution>at<address>, <Name of the Institution>at<address>,
<Name of the Institution>at<address>, under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating in the same
Campus

ix. Introduction of OCI/Foreign Nationals/Children of Indian workers in Gulf Countries in the following

Programme(s)/Course(s)

x. Increase in Intake in Course(s)/Additional Course(s)/Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course/
Fellow Programme in Management

xi. Closure of the Institution

xii. Change of Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University) from <Name of the
Institution>at<address>to<Name of the University>at<address>

xiii. Change in the Name of the Course(s)/Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in Intake/ Closure of
Programme(s)/Course(s)

xiv. Change the Name of the Institution from<Name of the Institution>(Old)at<address>to<Name of the
Institution>(new)

xv.  Changein the Minority Status of the Institution from <Type of the Institution> to <Type of the Institution>

xvi. Change in the Name of the affiliating University/Board from<present University/Board>to the new
University/ Board. Also it is resolved that, < Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company > shall apply for NOC
to both the Universities

xvii. Change in the Name of the Bank

xviii. Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company from<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> (Old)
at<address>to<Name of the Trust/ Society/Company>(new)

xix. Introduction of Collaboration and Twinning Programme with <Name of the University/ Institution>/
Necessary facilities shall be provided to the students of <Name of the University/ Institution>

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 239 ---
xx.  Applicationwronglysubmittedfor.............andtobechanged from <Application for..... >to <Application
for.....>/Not interested in applying for....../revoke the application submitted for <.........>.Paid the
necessary TER Charges along with the Penalty for Late Submission, as applicable.

xxi. Starting of the Vocational Degree/Diploma Programme under NSQF
< Name of the Institution>at<address>.

<Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company>shall also allocate required funds for the creation of the requisite
facilities such as procurement of...... Acre of Land ,additional carpet and Built-up area, appointment
of required Faculty, procurement of Equipment, furniture, for creation of suitable hostel/residential
accommodation for the students of Foreign Nationals/Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian
Workers in Gulf Countries and other required entities as applicable for the smooth functioning of the
same.

<Name of the Institution>shall apply for,
1. Change in the Name of the Course(s) in <Course1..... (Intake.....), Course2 .....(Intake.....),>

2. ReductioninIntakein<Course1>,from<currentIntake>to<reducedIntake>,<Course2>,from
<current Intake> to <reduced Intake>

3. Closure of Programme<Programme1>, <Programme2>.
4. Closure of Course(s) <Course1>, <Course2>.

(Signature and Name of the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust / Society/ Company), (Designation), (Name
of the Organization)

Note: Formats given by the Institutions reflecting the content of the concerned Format shall be accepted

*Strike off whichever is not applicable

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 240 ---
FORMAT-4

MoU to be Signed between the Institution and Skill Knowledge
Providers/ Trainers

Agreement
Under the National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) of the All India Council for Technical Education
This Agreement is entered into and executed on this ..... day of ....., 2021.. at New Delhi.

By and Between <Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company> offering <Name of the Institution> represented
by its Chairman.....which expression shall, where the context so admits, be deemed to include its successors,
executors and administrators of the ONE PART AND

<Name of the SKP> (hereinafter referred to as the”.....”) a Company registered under the Company Act, 1956,
through its <Name and Designation of the Signing Authority> having it’s registered/approved Office at (which
expression, unless it be repugnant to the context or meaning thereof, shall be deemed to mean and include
their executors, administrators and assigns), party of the SECOND PART.

WHEREAS, the All India Council for Technical Education has initiated a scheme to provide competency based
skills under the National Skill Qualification Framework (Here in after to be referred as NSQF)

WHEREAS, in terms of the said scheme launched by All India Council for Technical Education, AICTE has
extended invitation to various Institutions/ Organisations to join as Vocational Educational Institutions to
provide education component and Skill Knowledge Providers to provide Competency Based Skills.

WHEREAS under the scheme a Skill Knowledge Provider is required to perform the role and function of providing
hands on skill training in a specific sector i.e. in the Automobiles Sector, Skill Knowledge Provider shall be the
service centre of authorized automobile manufacturers located preferably all over the Country or in the IT
Sector, the Skill Knowledge Provider shall be the training sector of authorized IT Company located preferably
all over the Country. The Skill Knowledge Provider could also be one who is established for imparting hands on
skills or training in a respective sector;

WHEREAS the First Party is to participate as an Institution to register students under the National Skill
Qualification Framework (NSQF);

WHEREAS the Second Party has expressed its keen interest and desire to be a key Partner in the execution of
the National Vocational Educational Qualification Framework in terms of the objectives of the scheme and
policy as highlighted and specified in the said framework and particularly in view of the desire and interest
of <NAMEOFSKP> to join and Partner with <Name of the Institution>in providing competency based skills
through its centres which shall act as Skill Knowledge Provider for the purposes of the scheme;

WHEREAS Both parties have held discussions and agreed for collaboration for conducting Vocational Education
Programme(s) under the education scheme of the NSOF, where by <Name of the Institution> will impart and
a ward credits for the “Academic’ content” of the Curriculum and <Name of the SKP> will provide skill training
through its training centres called <Name of the SKP> - SKP’s and will impart and award credits for such ‘Skill
oriented training’ content of the Curriculum to the registered students.

WHEREAS The Second Party has registered it self with the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE)/
Concerned Authority and obtained approval there of to participate as <Name of the SKP> under the National
Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF);

THEREFORE, both the parties hereby agree to conduct Vocational Educational Programme initiated by AICTE
under NSOF, on the following terms and conditions:

1. The <Name of the SKP> agrees that centres approved and recognized by <Name of SKP> (herein after
to be referred as “<Name of SKP> -SKP”), shall act and perform the role of Skill Knowledge Provider to
provide hands on skill training in specific sectors such as <Name of Sector Specific Skill>.

2. The <Name of the SKP> agrees and undertakes that its <Name of the SKP> shall register with AICTE for

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 241 ---
conduct of training modules under the Vocational Stream and shall perform following functions:
Announce the schedule of module for the calendar year.
Register students for the modules.
Conduct the modular training.

Conduct examination/evaluate the student, award the grade indicating the Level of skill
acquired.

The <Name of the SKP> - SKP shall Register students for evaluation the Skill Modules, who have
acquired skills on their own.

3. The Second Party agrees that the following responsibilities shall be undertaken by the <Name of the
Institution> Academic Training centres:

a. The <Name of the Institution> Academic centres shall plan the Vocational Education Programme(s)
to be offered in the Academic Year concerned and inform the <Name of the SKP>- SKP’s about the
same at least two months prior to the date of commencement of the Programme (s).

b. The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall announce and inform through its prospectus
and information on its Web site, the Vocational Education Programme(s) it plans to offer in the
Academic Year concerned for the information of the prospective students and invite applications
for admission from interested candidates at least two months prior to the date of commencement
of the Programme(s).

c The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall follow the admission norms of AICTE and
the State Govt. concerned. The admission shall be made strictly on the merits. The <Name of the
Institution> - Academic Centre will then upload the names and details of the selected students on
AICTE Web-Portal.

d. The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will have their right to collect Fee from the
students towards:

Registration
Course/ Skill conduct

Evaluation of the Academic/ Skill portion of each Level of the Programme. A portion of the Fee
as agreed upon by the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre and the <Name of the SKP>
— SKP’s shall be turned over to the <Name of the SKP> -SKP’s.

e. The <Name of Institution> Academic Centre will send to the <Name of the SKP> - SKP the Level-
wise and Sector-wise lists of students registered for Vocational Education Programme(s) in the
Sectors.

f. The<Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will conduct appropriate Classes for the Academic
content of the Curriculum of the Vocational Education Programme(s) so as to complete the
Academic portion within prescribed time.

g. The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will conduct final examinations and evaluate the
students for the Academic portion of the Programme(s) as per the rules and regulations of the
Technical Board or University as the case may be.

h. After receiving a ‘Statement of Credits for the Vocational/Skill portion of the students from
the<Name of SKP> - SKP, the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will send the combined
Academic and Vocational/Skill portion credits of the students to the Technical Board or University
as the case may be.

i. Wherever such provisions are made by the Technical Board or the University, as the case may be,
the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will awarda’ Level Certificate’ to the student who
has successfully completed both the Academic and the Vocational/Skill portions of the particular
Level.

j. The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall maintaina record of the registered students
and Certificates issued and upload the same on AICTE Web-Portal.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 242 ---
k. The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre shall submit details of students registered,
evaluation conducted and results to the Technical Board or the University, as the case may be, and
also upload the same on AICTE Web-Portal.

4. General:
Fee to be charged to students:

a. The Level wise Fee to be charged by the <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will be
informed to the student by the <Name of Institution> Academic Centre as well as the <Name of
the SKP> - SKP before his/her registration for theProgramme;

b. The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will collect from the student and retain with it
self the ‘Academic Portion Fee’ and the <Name of the SKP> - SKP will be given the ‘Vocational/Skill
Portion Fee’ by the <Name of the SKP> — Academic Centre;

c The <Name of the Institution> Academic Centre will collect the total Fee for the Programme from
the students and will transfer the ‘Vocational/Skill Portion Fee’ against the number of students
to be sent for training at least one month before the onset of training. Any delay in transferring
the Fee will entail interest @ <to be mutually decided by the Institution and SKP> calculated on
the basis of delay a number of days. After receiving the Fee <Name of the SKP> - SKP will issue
Registration cards to the students at least 7 days before the onset of training.

5. No Confidentiality:

There shall not be any confidentiality of any information disclosed by both parties to each other,
eitherinoperationalizingthisagreementorforthepurposesofimplementingthisagreement.The
information sought under the Right to Information Act or otherwise by any student, shall be promptly
madeavailable.

6. Effective Date:

This agreement is effective from the date signed by both the parties shall be valid for a period of three
years until determined, suspended or terminated earlier.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto, each acting under due and proper authority have executed
this mutually binding Memorandum of Understanding as of the date first written above.

For Institution: For <Name of the SKP>
Signed: Signed:

Name: Name:

Title: Title:

Date: Date:

Witnessed by:

Signature: Name:
Date:
Signature: Name:
Date:

*Strike off whichever is not applicable

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 243 ---
ANNEXURE-1

National Perspective Plan
Recommended Short and Medium Term Perspectives for Engineering Education in India by the Committee

AICTE put a moratorium on opening new institutions in traditional areas of Engineering & Technology at
Degree, Diploma and PG Level from 2020-21 onwards for two years in 2019. A committee was constituted in
Oct, 2021 for “Reviewing Moratorium on Approval to New Engineering Institutions from Academic Year 2022-
23 onwards” under the chairmanship of Shri BVR Mohan Reddy. The committee has gone through the intake
capacity, trends of enrolment and placements in UG, PG and Diploma Level in AICTE Approved Institutions and
after data analysis submitted its report on 31.12.2021.

The main highlights of the report are as follows:
Undergraduate (B.Tech.) Programmes:

New institutions: Moratorium on new engineering institutions should continue barring with a few exceptions
such as:

a) AICTE may allow well-meaning philanthropists, educationists or educational foundations to create new
institutions of excellence. Such institutions should create a capacity of 3000 seats in line with NEP 2020
guidelines. Further, these institutions should have large owned campus and student amenities comparable
with that of globally reputed institutions. AICTE may suitably frame the financial and infrastructure
requirements for creating such institutions. These should offer core and interdisciplinary courses with
emphasis on emerging technologies and employable skills, have collaborations with reputed foreign
educational institutions, partner with corporates, and gain an NIRF ranking of <100 in the first five years
and <50 in 10 years of their founding.

b) As per Government of India guidelines, every aspirational district in the country (220 of them) should
have an engineering college. Currently, only 180 districts are covered. The State governments be given the
flexibility to start engineering colleges in the remaining 40+ districts. The State governments must provide
necessary budgets for infrastructure, faculty and labs before seeking approval to set up an engineering
college in districts that do not have one.

c) Facilitate conditional capacity creation in existing institutions: While the situation of low enrolments is
concerning, continuing a blanket ban on new capacities may be detrimental to the future sustenance of
quality engineering education. It will be prudent to facilitate limited and conditional capacity creation
based on the following guidelines: It is observed that a few institutions have reported more than 100%
enrolments in 2021. A number of institutes have reported >80% enrolments. It would be prudent that extra
capacities be permitted to institutions with good NIRF ranking (<100) that have reported >80% enrolments
last three years as below:

i) 95-100% enrolments - additional capacity of 25% be permitted
ii) 80-95% enrolments - additional capacity of 15% may be permitted

Colleges that have more than 50% of enrolment should be allowed to start new courses in emerging
technologies within their existing capacity. At the same time, the capacity in core engineering disciplines
such as mechanical, electrical, electronics and civil engineering cannot be reduced by more than 50% of
the approved capacity. Address the demand-supply imbalance through supply-side corrections. Installed
capacity exists, we need to shift focus to quality education to enhance foundational skills and industry-
linked internships.

Digital Technologies:

Digital technologies should become integral to curricula across all engineering disciplines. A minor in digital
technologies is mandatory for all the disciplines. Programmes in digital technologies at UG level have limited
visibility in the industry. Focus on faculty training, blended learning, projects and industry internships to
improve specialised skill talent. Capacities in four-year programmes in digital technologies should be reviewed
and modulated on an annual basis keeping the industry needs and skill shortages in view.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 244 ---
New Disciplines & Specialisations

Introduce new disciplines that are industry-relevant - Communication and Security Engineering, Manufacturing
Engineering (additive, subtractive, 3D printing, etc), Transport Engineering, Energy Engineering, Information
Engineering, Public Health Engineering (water, environment, pollution, sewage etc), Healthcare Engineering,
Computational Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Geomatics/ Geospatial science & technology/
Geoinformatics, etc (indicative list, not exhaustive). Some of these could be made available at masters’ level.
Thematic undergraduate programmes in Circular Economy, Sustainability, Environment, etc.

+ — Introduce new specialisations - Microelectronics and VLSI, smart mobility, EV technology, Transportation,
Highway engineering, Renewable Energy, Climate Change, Earth System Sciences, Future Communications
especially 5G, Sustainable Development & Circular Economy, Waste Management, Product Design, Al plus
technologies like CRISPR — Cas 9 (indicative list, not exhaustive).

+ Electives & Credits:

Have a large number of elective credits available across disciplines. For example, a student in ME does 50%
basic of ME, then they get to choose from a large number of electives and are given the flexibility to do a full
semester internship with the industry.

The total number of credits for graduation must be reduced from the current 160-180 to 135-140. The objective
is to encourage students to give more time to self-study, group discussions/projects and peer group learning.
This would nurture the culture of self-directed learning as opposed to being confined to passive classroom
learning for more time.

+ Core disciplines (ME, EE, EC, CE) need urgent revamp to cater to the rapidly evolving needs of the industry
and rapid changes occurring in technologies. Core engineering industry should proactively support
engineering institutes to produce engineers of the required skill set in their own interest. Each engineering
industry should tie up with or adopt core engineering departments of at least 3-5 engineering colleges,
help them develop curricula in core engineering branches, and mentor the students and faculty.

+ Encourage start-up and entrepreneurship activity in core branches by setting up innovation hubs and
tinkering labs, providing financial and mentoring support to students of core branches with innovative
ideas, and providing credits for spending time on such ideas.

+ Provide a chance for core disciplines to do a Double Major by undertaking extra credits.

+ Start centres of excellence (CoEs) in core branches and involve students to get them excited to take up
various projects.

2. Post Graduate (M.Tech) Programmes

The enrolment trends in post-graduate programmes confirm that there is no state, discipline or institution
category (government/private) for which the moratorium of approval to PG programmes in engineering
institutions can be lifted. Existing PG programmes need to be restructured and made R&D and Industry Centric.
Institutions /universities should replace the courses that have lost relevance with those in demand from the
industry and those in line with government vision.

3. Diploma Programmes

i) The enrolment trends in diploma programmes confirm that about 50% of existing capacity is lying
vacant. This warrants us not to add any new capacity.

ii) There is an urgent need to review the curricula of diploma programmes. In the Western world, diploma
holders, who primarily graduate from what are known as community colleges, find a lot of relevance in
the industry. Indian industry is suffering on account of the non-availability of such relevant and well-
trained manpower. This needs serious attention.

iii) Laboratory equipment is poorly maintained and is outdated. For India to emergeasa globally competitive
nation across sectors, it is essential to strengthen this stream of basic engineering talent.

iv) Industry-academia connect is critical for diploma holders. Internships and apprenticeships need to be
used extensively.

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 245 ---
ANNEXURE-2

Aspirational Districts (formerly declared as educationally backward)

State/Districts SI. No. State/Districts

SI. No.

ARUNACHAL PRADESH HARYANA
ASSAM HIMACHAL PRADESH

Goalpara JHARKHAND

=
2
a
18 Katihar Latehar
Lohardaga
=
P—
s7_
ss

Khagaria

Muzaffarpur
Palamu

EN
Pashchimi Singhbhum

Purnia
Sheikhpura Purbi Singhbhum

Sitamarhi Ramgarh

fas [alone id [Siege
ee

30 Korba KERALA

Ee

AICTE ‘¥» APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK
--- Page 246 ---
SI. No. State/Districts SI. No. State/Districts
64 Chhatarpur PUNJAB

67 Khandwa RAJASTHAN
68 Rajgarh 91 Baran
69 Singrauli 92 Dhaulpur
70 Vidisha 93 Jaisalmer
MAHARASHTRA 94 Karauli
71 Gadchiroli 95 Sirohi
72 Nandurbar SIKKIM
74 Washim TAMILNADU
MANIPUR 97 Ramanathapuram
MEGHALAYA TELANGANA
MIZORAM 100 Bhoopalapalli (Warangal)
NAGALAND TRIPURA
ODISHA UTTAR PRADESH
Balangir 103 Bahraich
80 Dhenkanal 104 Balrampur
81 Gajapati 105 Chandauli
82 Kalahandi 106 Chitrakoot
83 Kandhamal 107 Fatehpur
84 Koraput 108 Shrawasti
85 Malkangiri 109 Siddharthnagar
86 Nabarangapur 110 Sonbhadra
87 Nuapada UTTARAKHAND
88 Rayagada 111 Hardwar
112 Udham Singh Nagar

NOTE: This list is as per NITI Aayog and is subjected to change from time to time.

Refer Link: https://limararuv5gr0sh-nitiprdadw.adb.ap-mumbai-1.oraclecloudapps.com/ords/f?p=100:3

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 247 ---
ANNEXURE-3

Closest available Nomenclature of Under Graduate Degrees for the
Diploma in Engineering and Technology (Conversion of Levels)

Ss. Existing Nomenclature of Diploma Closest Nomenclature of Under
No. Graduate Degree
1 Aero Space Engineering
2 Aeronautical Engineering . ; .

Aeronautical Engineering
3 Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Avionics)
4 | Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
5 | Agricultural Engineering . ; ;
- Agriculture Engineering
6 | Agricultural Technology
7 {Architectural Assistantship
8 Interior Decoration Architecture Engineering
9 Interior Design
10 | Automobile Engineering
11 |Automobile Engineering (Automobile Fitter)
12 |Automotive Engineering Automobile Engineering
13. |Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
14 |Mechanical Engineering Automobile
15 |Biomedical Engineering ; ; ; ;
Biomedical Engineering

16 | Biomedical Instrumentation
17 | Biotechnology Biotechnology
18 |Ceramic Engineering and Technology
19 |Ceramic Technology ; ; ;

- - - Ceramic Engineering
20 |Ceramics Engineering
21 |Glass and Ceramics Engineering
22 |Chemical Engineering
23 | Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer)
24 |Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)
25 |Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)
26 |Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)
27 |Chemical Engineering (Sugar Technology)
28 | Chemical Technology Chemical Engineering
29 | Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)
30 | Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic Technology)
31. | Chemical Technology Fertilizer
32 | Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)
33 | Surface Coating Technology
34 |Technical Chemistry
35 |Civil and Environmental Engineering
36 | Civil and Rural Engineering . . ;

— - - - - Civil Engineering

37 | Civil (Public Health and Environment) Engineering
38 | Civil Draftsman

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 212 |
--- Page 248 ---
39 |Civil Engineering

40 | Civil Engineering and Planning

41 | Civil Engineering (Building Services Engineering)

42 |Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)

43 | Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution Control)

45 | Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)

(
(
44 | Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)
(
(

46 | Civil Engineering (Rural Engineering)

47 | Civil Engineering (Water Resource and Management)

48 | Civil Environmental Engineering

49 | Civil Technology

50 | Civil Engineering (Construction)
51. | Civil (SFS Mode)
52 |Construction Engineering

53 | Construction Technology

54 |Construction Technology and Management

55 |Geoinformatics and Surveying Technology

56 | Quantity Surveying and Construction Management

57 | Survey Engineering

58 |Water Resource Management

59 |Geographic Information System and Global Positioning
System

60 |Transportation Engineering

61 |Water Technology and Health Science

62 |Advanced Computer Application

63 |Campus Wide Network Design and Maintenance

64 |Computer Hardware and Networking

65 |Computer and Information Science

66 |Computer Applications

67 |Computer Engineering

68 |Computer Engineering and Application

69 |Computer Hardware and Maintenance

70 |Computer Hardware and Networking

71 |Computer Networking

72. |Computer Science and Engineering Computer Science and Engineering

73 |Computer Science

74 |Computer Science and Technology

75 |Computer Science and Information Technology

76 |Computer Science and Systems Engineering

77 |Computer Software Technology

78 |Computer Technology

79 |Computer Technology and Applications

80 | Cyber Forensics and Information Security

81 |I.T. (Courseware Engineering)

82 | Information and Communication Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 249 ---
83 | Information Engineering

84 |Information Science

85 | Information Science and Engineering

86 |Information Science and Technology

87 |Information Security Management

88 | Information Technology

89 | Information Technology and Engineering

90 |Information Technology Enabled Services and
Management

91 | Network Engineering

92 |Web Designing

93 |Web Technologies

94 | Advanced Communication and Information System

95 | Electronics and Computer Engineering

96 | Dairy Engineering Dairy Engineering

97 | Electrical and Electronics (Power System) Electrical Engineering

98 | Electrical and Electronics Engineering

99 | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering

100 | Electrical and Mechanical Engineering

101 | Electrical and Power Engineering

102 | Electrical Energy Systems

103 | Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)

104 | Electrical Engineering

105 | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

106 | Electrical Engineering (Industrial Control)

107 | Electrical Machines

108 | Electrical Power Systems

109 | Power Systems Engineering

110 | Electronics and Electrical Engineering

111 | Advanced Communication and Information System Electronics and Communication

112 | Advanced Electronics and Communication Engineering Engineering

113 | Applied Electronics

114 | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

115 | Bio Electronics

116 | Digital Communications

117 | Digital Electronics

118 | Digital Electronics and Microprocessor

119 | Digital Electronics and Communication Engineering

120 | Digital Systems

121 | Electronic Engineering

122 | Electronic Instrumentation and Control Engineering

123 | Electronic Science and Engineering

124 | Electronics

125 | Electronics and Avionics

126 | Electronics and Communication Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 214 |
--- Page 250 ---
127

Electronics and Communication Engineering (Industry
Integrated)

128

Electronics and Communication Technology

129

Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

130

Electronics and Production

131

Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering

132

Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
(Technology electronicRadio)

133

Electronics and Video Engineering

134

Electronics (Fiber Optics)

135

Electronics (Robotics)

136

Electronics and Communication Engineering (Microwaves)

137

Electronics and Computer Engineering

138

Electronics and Electrical Engineering

139

Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering (Radio
and System)

140

Electronics Communication and Instrumentation
Engineering

141

Electronics Engineering

142

Electronics Engineering (Industry Integrated)

143

Electronics Engineering (Micro Electronics)

144

Electronics Engineering (Specialization in Consumer
Electronics)

145

Electronics Engineering (Modern Consumer Electronics)

146

Electronics Engineering With Microprocessor

147

Electronics Instrumentation and Control Engineering

148

Electronics Production and Maintenance

149

Electronics Robotics

150

Electronics Technology

151

Embedded Systems

152

Industrial Electronics

153

Micro Electronics

154

Opto-Electronics Engineering

155

Power Electronics

156

Telecommunication Engineering

157

Telecommunication Technology

158

TV and Sound Engineering

159

Information and Communication Technology

160

Electrical and Electronics (Power System)

161

Electrical and Electronics Engineering

162

Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

163

Environmental Engineering

164

Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution Control)

165

Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

166

Civil Environmental Engineering

Environmental Engineering

167

Fire Technology and Safety

Fire and Safety Engineering

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 251 ---
168

Food Processing and Preservation

169

Food Processing Technology

170

Food Technology

Food Engineering

171

Automation and Robotics

172

Control and Instrumentation

173

Instrument Technology

174

Instrumentation

175

Instrumentation and Control Engineering

176

Instrumentation (E&C)

177

Instrumentation Engineering

178

Instrumentation Technology

179

Instruments and Medical Equipment

180

Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

181

Electronic Instrumentation and Control Engineering

182

Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

183

Electronics Robotics

184

Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering

185

Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)

186

ECG Technology

187

Automation Engineering

188

Electronics Communication and Instrumentation
Engineering

Instrumentation Engineering

189

Footwear Technology

190

Leather and Fashion Technology

191

Leather Goods and Footwear Tech

192

Leather Technology

193

Leather Technology (Footwear)

194

Leather Technology Footwear Computer Aided Shoe
Design

195

Leather Technology Tanning

196

Saddlery Technology and Export Management

Leather Technology

197

Marine Engineering and Systems

198

Marine Engineering

199

Marine Engineering and Systems (Artificer Training)

200

Marine Engineering and Systems

Marine Engineering

201

CAD CAM

202

Design and Drafting

203

Foundry Technology

204

Heat Power Engineering

205

Machine Engineering

206

Mechanical (Computer Aided Design, Manufacture and
Engineering)

207

Mechanical CAD/CAM

208

Mechanical Engineering(Industry Integrated)

209

Mechanical Engineering

210

Mechanical Engineering (Auto)

Mechanical Engineering

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 252 ---
Mechanical Engineering (Maintenance)

N
N

Mechanical Engineering (Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning)

Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die)

Mechanical Engineering Automobile

Mechanical Engineering Power Plant Engineering

Mechanical Engineering Production

Mechanical Engineering Specialization in CAD

Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering

NIN INININI NIN
OlOINIA/M/ AI] wW

Mechanical Engineering Tube Well Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM)

221

Mechanical Engineering (Foundry)

222

Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool Maintenance and
Repairs)

223

Mechanical Engineering (Repair and Maintenance)

224

Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal Engineering

225

Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical and Electrical

226

Refrigeration and Air Conditioning

227

Industrial Engineering and Management

228

Maintenance Engineering

229

Material Management

230

Energy Systems Engineering

231

Mechatronics

232

Robotics and Mechatronics

Mechatronics

233

Metallurgical Engineering

234

Metallurgy

235

Metallurgy and Material Technology

Metallurgical Engineering

236

Artificer Training (Electronics)

237

Artificer Training (Electrical)

238

Artificer Training (Mechanical)

239

Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter)

240

Weapons Engineering

241

Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical and Electrical

Military Engineering

242

Mine Engineering

243

Mine Surveying

244

Mining and Mine Surveying

245

Shipbuilding Engineering

246

Drilling Engineering

247

Drilling Technology

Mining Engineering

248

Paint Technology

249

Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)

250

Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)

Oil and Paint Technology

251

Packaging Technology

252

Printing and Packing Technology

Packaging Technology

253

Petrochemical Engineering

Petrochemical Engineering

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 253 ---
254 | Petrochemical Refinery

255 | Petrochemical Technology

256 | Petroleum Engineering

257 | Petroleum Technology

258 | Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)
259 | Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology Pharmaceutical Engineering
260 | Plastic and Mould Technology

261 | Plastic and Polymer Engineering

262 | Plastic Engineering

263 | Plastic Mould Technology

264 | Plastic Technology

265 | Plastics Processing and Testing

266 | Polymer Engineering and Technology

267 | Polymer Technology

268 | Plastic Process and Testing

269 | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

270 | Printing and Packing Technology

271 | Printing Technology

272 | Industrial and Production Engineering

273 | Machine Tools and Maintenance Engineering

273 | Machine Tools Technology

274 | Manufacturing Engineering

275 | Manufacturing Technology

276 | Precision Manufacturing

277 | Production and Industrial Engineering

278 | Production Engineering

279 | Production Technology

280 | Tool and Die Making

281 | Tool and Die Engineering

282 | Tool and Die Under Mechanical Engineering

283 | Tool Die and Mould Making

284 | Fabrication Technology

285 | Fabrication Technology and Erection Engineering

286 | CAD CAM

287 | Design and Drafting

288 | Foundry Technology

289 | Mechanical (Computer Aided Design, Manufacture and
Engineering)
290 | Mechanical CAD/CAM

291 | Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die)

292 | Mechanical Engineering Production

293 | Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering

294 | Mechanical Engineering (CAD/CAM)

295 | Mechanical Engineering (Foundry)

296 | Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool Maintenance and
Repairs)
297 | Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal Engineering
298 | Pulp Technology

299 | Wood and Paper Technology

Plastic and Polymer Technology

Printing Technology

Production Engineering

Pulp Technology

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 254 ---
300 | Apparel Design and Fabric

301 | Apparel Design and Fabrication Technology

302 | Apparel Design and Fashion Technology

303 | Apparel Manufacture and Design

304 | Apparel Technology

305 | Computer Aided Costume Design and Dress Making
306 | Costumer Design and Dress Making

307 | Handloom and Textile Technology

308 | Textile Technology (Man Made Fibre Technology)
309 | Dress Designing and Garment Manufacturing
Fashion and Clothing Technology

Fashion and Design

Fashion and Apparel Design

Fashion Designing

Fashion Designing and Garment Technology
Fashion Technology

Garment Technology

Garment and Fashion Technology

Garment Design and Fashion Technology
Garment Fabrication

320 | Garment Manufacturing Technology

321 | Handloom and Textile Technology

322 | Knitting and Garment Technology

323 | Knitting Technology

324 | Textile Chemistry

325 | Textile Design

326 | Textile Designing

327 | Textile Designing Printing

328 | Textile Engineering

329 | Textile Manufactures

330 | Textile Manufacturing and Technology

331 | Textile Marketing and Management

332 | Textile Processing

333 | Textile Processing Technology

334 | Textile Technology

335 | Textile Technology (Textile Design and Weaving)
336 | Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre )

337 | CDDM (Costume Design and Dress Making)

338 | Rubber Technology Rubber Technology

Textile Technology

Wy] Ww] Ww) Ww] Ww] Ww] Ww] Ww] Ww] Ww
WlOIN|D/ NA] WIN} —|o

339 | Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic Technology)
340 | Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)

341 | Hotel Management and Catering Technology Hotel Management and Catering
Technology
342 | Biomedical Instrumentation Medical Electronics

343 | Medical Electronics Engineering
344 | Medical Electronics
345 | Medical Laboratory Technology

346 | Instruments and Medical Equipment

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 255 ---
347 | Cement Technology *

348 | Engineering Education *
349 | Fisheries Technology *
350 | Home Science *
351 | Jewellery Design and Manufacture Technology *
352 | Library and Information Science *
353 | Sugar Technology *
354 | Travel and Tourism *
355 | Wood Technology *
356 | Beauty and Hair Dressing *
357 | Beauty Culture and Cosmetology *
358 | Cosmetology and Health *
359 | Applied Videography *
360 | Audiography and Sound Engineering *
361 | Cinematography *
362 | Direction Screen Play Writing and TV Production *
363 | Film and Video Editing *
364 | Film Editing and TV Production *

365 | Film Technology and TV Production (Cinematography) *

366 | Film Technology and TV Production (Film Processing) *

367 | Film Technology and TV Production (Sound Recording and |*
Sound Engineering)

368 | Film Technology (Animation and Visual Effects) *
369 | Photography *
370 | Sound Recording Engineering *
371 | Mass Communication *
372 | Accounts and Audit *
373 | Administration Services *
374 | Computer Application and Business Management *
375 | Finance Account and Auditing *
376 | Modern Office Management *
377 | Modern Office Management and Secretarial Practice *
378 | Modern Office Practice *
379 | Commercial and Computer Practice *
380 | Commercial Practice *
381 | Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG) *
382 | ECG Technology *
383 | Health Care Technology *
384 | Ophthalmic Technology *
385 | Technician X-Ray Technology *
386 | 3-D Animation and Graphics *
387 | Animation and Multimedia Technology *
388 | Multimedia Technology *

Note: The Institutions offering * Diploma Course(s) have to continue at the same Level or may opt for the
Closure of the Course.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 220 |
--- Page 256 ---
ANNEXURE-4

Closest available Nomenclature of Diploma for the Under Graduate
Degree in Engineering and Technology (For conversion of Levels)

S.No. Existing Nomenclature of Under Graduate Degree Closest Nomenclature of Diploma

1 Aero Space Engineering Aeronautical Engineering

Aeronautical Engineering

Aircraft Maintenance Engineering

Agricultural Engineering Agricultural Engineering

Agriculture Engineering

Architectural Assistantship Architectural Assistantship

2
3
4
5 Agricultural Technology
6
7
8

Architecture and Interior Decoration

9 Architecture Assistantship

10 | Automobile Engineering Automobile Engineering

11 | Automobile Maintenance Engineering

12 | Automotive Technology

13 | Mechanical Engineering Automobile

14 | Biomedical Engineering Biomedical Engineering

15 | Biomedical Instrumentation

16 | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering

17 | Biotechnology Biotechnology

18 | Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering

19 | Industrial Biotechnology

20 | Ceramic Engineering and Technology Ceramics Engineering

21 | Ceramic Technology

22 | Ceramics Engineering

23 | Chemical and Electro Chemical Engineering Chemical Engineering

24 | Biochemical Engineering

25 | Chemical Engineering

26 | Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

27 | Chemical Technology
28 | Dye Stuff Technology
29 | Surface Coating Technology Surface Coating Technology
30 | Oil and Paint Technology
31 | Oil Technology Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)

32 | Oils, Oleo chemicals and Surfactants Technology

33 | Paint Technology

34 | Building and Construction Technology Civil Engineering (Construction
Technology)

35 | Construction Engineering

36 | Construction Technology

37 | Construction Technology and Management

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 257 ---
38 | Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)

39 | Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

40 | Civil and Environmental Engineering

41 | Environment Engineering

42 | Environmental Engineering

43 | Environmental Science and Engineering Civil and Environmental Engineering

44 | Environmental Science and Technology

45 | Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

46 | Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)

47 | Civil and Rural Engineering

48 | Civil Technology

49 | Civiland Water Management Engineering

Civil Engineering
50 | Civil Engineering

51 | Civil Engineering and Planning

52 | Construction Engineering and Management

53 | Geo Informatics Geo informatics and Surveying Technology

54 | 3-D Animation and Graphics

3-D Animation and Graphics
55 | Advanced Computer Application

56 | Computer and Communication Engineering

57 | Computer Engineering

58 | Computer Engineering and Application

59 | Computer Networking

60 | Computer Science and Engineering

61 | Computer Science

Computer Engineering Computer Science

62 | Computer Science and Technology and Engineering

63 | Computer Science and Information Technology

64 | Computer Science and Systems Engineering

65 | Computer Technology

66 | Computing in Computing

67 | Computing in Multimedia

68 | Computing in Software

69 | Information and Communication Technology

70 | Information Engineering

71 | Information Science and Engineering

72. | Information Science and Technology Information Technology and Engineering

73 | Information Technology

74 | Information Technology and Engineering

75 | Software Engineering

76 | Dairy Engineering

Dairy Engineering

77 | Dairy Technology

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 222 |
--- Page 258 ---
78 | Electrical and Computer Engineering
79 | Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
80 | Electrical and Electronics Engineering
81 | Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
82. | Electrical Engineering Electrical Engineering Electrical and
ectronics Engineering

83 | Electronics and Electrical Engineering
84 | Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)
85 | Electrical Instrumentation and Control Engineering
86 | Electrical, Electronics and Power
87 | Electrical and Mechanical Engineering
88 | Electrical and Power Engineering Electrical and Power Engineering
89 | Electrical Engineering Industrial Control
90 | Advanced Communication and Information System
91 | Advanced Electronics and Communication

Engineering Advanced Electronics and Communication
92 | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering | Engineering
93 | Applied Electronics and Communications
94 | Communication Engineering
95 | Digital Techniques for Design and Planning a ;

- 7 - Digital Electronics

96 | Electronic Engineering
97 | Electronic Science and Engineering
98 | Electronics
99 | Electronics and Communication Engineering Electronics and Communication Engineering
100 | Electronics and Communication Engineering

(Industrylntegrated)
101 | Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering
102 | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
103 | Electronics and Telecommunication

Engineering(Technologynician Electronic Radio)
104 | Electronics Communication and Instrumentation

Engineering
105 | Radio Physics and Electronics Electronics and Telecommunication
106 | Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering | Engineering
107 | Telecommunication Engineering
108 | Electronics and Biomedical Engineering
109 | Electronics and Communication Engineering

(Microwaves)
110 | Electronics and Communication Engineering
111 | Electronics and Computer Science
112 | Electronics and Control Systems
113 | Electronics and Electrical Engineering
114 | Electronics and Power Engineering
115 | Electronics and Telematics Engineering Electronics and Electrical Engineering
116 | Electronics Design Technology
117 | Electronics Engineering
118 | Electronics Instrumentation and Control Engineering

AICTE

*y' APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 259 ---
119 | Electronics System Engineering
120 | Electronics Technology
121 | Optics and Optoelectronics Opto-Electronics Engineering
122 | Power Electronics
123 | Power Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering Power Electronics
124 | Power Electronics Engineering
125 | Fire Technology and Safety ;
- - - - Fire Technology and Safety

26 | Safety and Fire Engineering
127 | Food Engineering and Technology
128 | Food Processing and Preservation
129 | Food Processing Technology Food Technology
130 | Food Technology
131 | Food Technology and Management
132 | Automation and Robotics

- - - Automation Engineering
133 | Automation Engineering
134 | Instrument Technology
135 | Instrumentation
136 | Instrumentation and Control Engineering ; ; ;
- - Instrumentation Engineering
137 | Instrumentation and Electronics
138 | Instrumentation Engineering
139 | Instrumentation Technology
140 | Robotics and Automation Automation and Robotics
141 | Medical Electronics Engineering
142 | Medical Electronics Medical Electronics Engineering
143 | Medical Lab Technology
144 | Foot Wear Technology Footwear Technology
145 | Leather Technology Leather Technology
146 | Naval Architecture and Ship Building Engineering oe ; ;
————— - - Shipbuilding Engineering
147 | Shipbuilding Engineering
148 | Marine Engineering . . .
Marine Engineering
149 | Marine Technology
150 | Industrial and Production Engineering
151 | Industrial Engineering
152 | Industrial Engineering and Management Industrial and Production
153 | Mechanical Engineering (Production) Engineering
154 | Production and Industrial Engineering
155 | Production Engineering
156 | Manufacturing Engineering
157 | Manufacturing Engineering and Automation
158 | Manufacturing Engineering and Technology ; ; .
- - - - Manufacturing Engineering

159 | Manufacturing Process and Automation Engineering
160 | Manufacturing Science and Engineering
161 | Manufacturing Technology
162 | Mechanical and Automation Engineering Mechanical Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 224 |
--- Page 260 ---
163

Mechanical Engineering (Industry Integrated)

164

Mechanical Engineering

165

Power Engineering

166

Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)

167

Mechanical Engineering Automobile

168

Mechanical Engineering (Repair and Maintenance)

Mechanical Engineering
(Automobile)

169

Precision Manufacturing

170

Mechatronics

171

Mechatronics Engineering

Mechatronics

172

Tool Engineering

Tool and Die Engineering

173

Material Science and Technology

174

Metallurgical and Materials Engineering

175

Metallurgical Engineering

176

Metallurgy

177

Metallurgy and Material Technology

Metallurgical Engineering

178

Mine Engineering

179

Mining Engineering

Mining Engineering

180

Packaging Technology

181

Printing and Packing Technology

182

Printing Technology

Printing and Packing Technology

183

Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery Engineering

184

Petrochemical Engineering

185

Petrochemical Technology

186

Petroleum Engineering

187

Petroleum Technology

Petroleum Engineering

188

Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical Technology
Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology

189

Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology

Pharmaceutical Chemistry and
Technology

190

Plastic and Polymer Engineering

191

Plastics Engineering

192

Plastics Technology

193

Polymer Engineering

194

Polymer Engineering and Technology

195

Polymer Science and Chemical Technology

196

Polymer Science and Technology

197

Polymer Technology

Plastic and Polymer Engineering

198

Pulp Technology

Pulp Technology

199

Apparel and Production Management

Apparel Manufacture and Design

200

Fashion and Apparel Technology

201

Fashion and Apparel Engineering

202

Fashion Technology

Fashion and Apparel Design

203

Fibres and Textiles Processing Technology

204

Jute and Fibre Technology

205

Man Made Fibre Technology

Textile Processing Technology

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 261 ---
206 | Man-Made Textile Technology
207 | Silk Technology

208 | Textile Chemistry

209 | Textile Engineering

: ; : Textile Engineering
210 | Textile Plant Engineering

211 | Textile Processing

212 | Textile Technology

213 | Rubber Technology Rubber Technology
214 | Cement and Ceramic Technology Cement Technology
215 | Nano Science and Technology *
216 | Nano Technology *
217 | Nano Technology and Robotics *
218 | Planning *
219 | Energy and Environmental Management *
220 | Energy Engineering *
221 | Airline Management *

NOTE: The Institutions offering * Degree Course(s) have to continue at the same Level or may opt for the
Closure of the Course.

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 262 ---
ANNEXURE-5

Process Flow Chart for the Establishment of a New Technical Institution
Issue of LoA/ LoR

Application Submitted

Scrutiny Committee

Recommend for Expert Deficiency Noted Scrutiny Committee § Applicant Absent for

Scrutiny Committee

Visit Committee (EVC) Rescheduled

Re-Scrutiny Committee Evaluation

Recommend for Expert Deficiency noted

licant Absent
Visit Committee Scrutiny

for Re-Scrutiny

Committee

Nil Deficiency

Regional Committee

Executive Committee

v
Recommended for LOA Recommended for LOR
v

Issue of Letter of Rejection
with Speaking Order

Deposit Requested
Deposit & Affidavit Received

Standing Appellate
Committee (SAC)
Issue of Letter of Approval

Executive Council

AICTE ‘*y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 202
--- Page 263 ---
Recommended
‘or LOA

Standing Appellate

Committee (SAC) Rejected

Scrutiny Committee Evaluation Recommended for EVC

Applicant absent Deficiency Recommended for EVC
for Scrutiny Noted

Expert Visit
Committee

Deficiency Notes

Standing Appellate Committee (SAC)

v
Recommended for LOA Recommended for LOR

v

Deposit Requested

v
Deposit & Affidavit

Executive Council

Issue of Letter of Issue of Final Letter of
Approval Rejection with Speaking Order

AICTE ‘¥» APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK
--- Page 264 ---
ANNEXURE-6

Major Disciplines, their corresponding Courses and Relevant/
Appropriate Branch of Under Graduate Degree in Engineering and

Technology
Major Corresponding Under Graduate Degree Courses permissible for Merger
Disciplines Course(s)
Aeronautical ical Aero Space Engineering
Engineering peronauitica Aeronautical Engineering
ngineering
Aircraft Maintenance Engineering
Agriculture , Agricultural Engineering
Engineering fariculture Agricultural Technology
ngineering
Agriculture Engineering
Architecture Architectural Assistantship
and Planning Architectural Engineering

Architecture and Interior Decoration

Architecture Assistantship

Architecture

Architecture (Interior Design)

Building Engineering and Construction Management

Interior Design

Environmental Planning

Infrastructure Planning

Planning

Urban and Regional Planning

Urban Design

Urban Planning

Urban Regeneration

Urban Transport Planning and Management

Biotechnology Biotechnology

Biotechnology | Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering

Industrial Biotechnology

Ceramic Cement and Ceramic Technology

Engineering Ceramic Ceramic Engineering and Technology

Engineering | Ceramic Technology

Ceramics Engineering

Civil Building and Construction Technology

Engineering Civil and Rural Engineering

Civil Engineering

Civil Engineering and Planning

Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)
Civil Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

Engineering _ | Civil Technology

Construction Engineering

Construction Engineering and Management

Construction Technology

Construction Technology and Management

Geo Informatics

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

Architecture

Planning
--- Page 265 ---
Environment
Engineering

Civil and Environmental Engineering

Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

Civil Engineering Environment and Pollution Control

Environment Engineering

Environmental Engineering

Environmental Science and Engineering

Environmental Science and Technology

Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)

Environmental Planning

Water
Resources

Civil and Water Management Engineering

Computer
Science and
Engineering

Computer
Science and
Engineering

3-D Animation and Graphics

Advanced Computer Application

Computer and Communication Engineering

Computer Engineering

Computer Engineering and Application

Computer Networking

Computer Science and Engineering

Computer Science

Computer Science and Technology

Computer Science and Information Technology

Computer Science and Systems Engineering

Computer Technology

Computing in Computing

Computing in Multimedia

Computing in Software

Electrical and Computer Engineering

Electronics and Computer Science

Electronics and Computer Engineering

Mathematics and Computing

Software Engineering

Information
Technology

nformation and Communication Technology

nformation Engineering

nformation Science and Engineering

nformation Science and Technology

nformation Technology

nformation Technology and Engineering

Chemical
Engineering

Chemical
Engineering

Chemical and Electro Chemical Engineering

Biochemical Engineering

Chemical Engineering

Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

Chemical Technology

Dye Stuff Technology

Surface Coating Technology

Oil and Paint
Technology

Oil and Paint Technology

Oil Technology

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 266 ---
Oils, Oleo Chemicals and Surfactants Technology

Paint Technology

Petrochemical
Engineering

Petrochem and Petroleum Refinery Engineering

Petrochemical Engineering

Petrochemical Technology

Petroleum Engineering

Petroleum Technology

Plastic and
Polymer
Technology

Plastic and Polymer Engineering

Plastics Engineering

Plastics Technology

Polymer Engineering

Polymer Engineering and Technology

Polymer Science and Chemical Technology

Polymer Science and Technology

Polymer Technology

Dairy
Engineering

Dairy
Engineering

Dairy Engineering

Dairy Technology

Electrical
Engineering

Electrical
Engineering

Electrical and Computer Engineering

Electrical and Electronics (Power System)

Electrical and Electronics Engineering

Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering

Electrical and Mechanical Engineering

Electrical and Power Engineering

Electrical Engineering

Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

Electrical Engineering Industrial Control

Electrical Instrumentation and Control Engineering

Electrical, Electronics and Power

Electronics and Computer Science

Electronics and Electrical Engineering

Electronics and Power Engineering

Energy
Engineering

Energy
Engineering

Energy and Environmental Management

Energy Engineering

Electronics
Engineering

Electronics
Engineering

Biomedical Engineering

Digital Techniques for Design and Planning

Electrical and Electronics Engineering

Electrical, Electronics and Power

Electronic Engineering

Electronic Science and Engineering

Electronics

Electronics and Computer Science

Electronics and Computer Engineering

Electronics and Control Systems

Electronics and Electrical Engineering

Electronics and Power Engineering

Electronics Design Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 267 ---
Electronics Engineering
Electronics System Engineering
Electronics Technology

Optics and Optoelectronics
Power Electronics

Power Electronics Engineering
Radio Physics and Electronics
Advanced Communication and Information System

Advanced Electronics and Communication Engineering

Applied Electronics and Communications

Biomedical Engineering
Communication Engineering

ectronics and Communication Engineering

Electronics and
Communication
Engineering

ectronics and Communication Engineering (Industry Integrated)

ectronics and Telecommunication Engineering

ectronics and Telecommunication Engineering (Technologynician

ectronic Radio)
ectronics and Communication Engineering (Microwaves)

ectronics Communication and Instrumentation Engineering

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

ectronics and Telematics Engineering

Telecommunication Engineering
Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

Automation and Robotics

Automation Engineering
Biomedical Instrumentation

ectrical Engineering Industrial Control

ectrical Instrumentation and Control Engineering

ectronics and Instrumentation Engineering

E
E
Electronic Instrumentation and Control Engineering
E
A

pplied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

ectronics and Instrumentation Engineering

ectronics Instrumentation and Control Engineering

Instrumentation
Engineering

ectronics and Control Systems
ectronics Communication and Instrumentation Engineering

E
E
Power Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering
E
E

Electronics Instrumentation and Control Engineering
Instrument Technology
Instrumentation

Instrumentation and Control Engineering

Instrumentation and Electronics

Instrumentation Engineering

Instrumentation Technology

Power Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

Robotics and Automation

Mechatronics | Mechatronics
Engineering | Mechatronics Engineering

Medical Electronics Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 268 ---
Medical Electronics

Medical Lab Technology

Medical
Electronics Electronics and Biomedical Engineering
Mechanical Electrical and Mechanical Engineering
Engineering Mechanical Engineering (Industry Integrated)
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical Mechanical Engineering (Repair and Maintenance)
Engineering Power Engineering
Industrial and Production Engineering
Machine Engineering
Manufacturing Engineering
Manufacturing Engineering and Automation
Manufacturing Engineering and Technology
Manufacturing Process and Automation Engineering
Production : :
Engi . Manufacturing Science and Engineering
ngineering
Manufacturing Technology
Mechanical Engineering (Production)
Precision Manufacturing
Production and Industrial Engineering
Production Engineering
Tool Engineering
Automobile Engineering
Automobile Maintenance Engineering
Automobile :
: ~ Automotive Technology
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)
Mechanical Engineering Automobile
Industrial and Production Engineering
Industrial : F :
: . Industrial Engineering
Engineering
Industrial Engineering and Management
Mechanical and Automation Engineering
Mechatronics x
: . Mechatronics
Engineering
Mechatronics Engineering
Fire and Safety Fire and Safety |Fire Technology and Safety
Engineering Engineering _ | Safety and Fire Engineering
Food Food Engineering and Technology
Engineering Food Processing and Preservation
Food F
Engi . Food Processing Technology
ngineering
Food Technology
Food Technology and Management
Leather Leather Foot Wear Technology
Technology Technology __ | Leather Technology
Marine Naval Architecture and Ship Building Engineering
Engineering Marine Shipbuilding Engineering
Engineering | Marine Engineering

Marine Technology

Material Science and Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 269 ---
Metallurgy Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
Engineering Metallurgy [Metallurgical Engineering
Engineering | Metallurgy
Metallurgy and Material Technology
Military Military Military Engineering
Engineering Engineering
Mining Mining Mine Engineering
Engineering Engineering __| Mining Engineering
Nano Technology Nano Science and Technology
Nano Nano Technolo
Technology oY

Nano Technology and Robotics

Nuclear Science

Nuclear Science

Nuclear Science and Technology

AndTechnology | And Technology
Packaging Packaging Packaging Technology
Technology Technology __| Printing and Packing Technology

Pharmaceutical

Pharmaceutical

Pharmaceuticals and Fine Chemical Technology

Engineering Engineering | Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology
Printing Printing Printing and Packing Technology
Engineering Engineering _| Printing Technology
Textile Fibres and Textiles Processing Technology
Engineering Jute and Fibre Technology
Man Made Fibre Technology
Man-Made Textile Technology
Textile Silk Technolo
Engineering gy
Textile Engineering
Textile Plant Engineering
Textile Processing
Textile Technology
Fashion Technology
Fashion Apparel and Production Management
Technology | Fashion and Apparel Technology
Fashion and Apparel Engineering
Textile Textile Chemistry
Chemistry
AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 234 |
--- Page 270 ---
ANNEXURE-7

Major Disciplines, their corresponding Courses and Relevant/
Appropriate Branch of Diploma in Engineering and Technology

Major Discipline |Corresponding | Diploma Courses permissible for Merger
Courses (if any)

Aeronautical Aero Space Engineering
Engineering

Aeronautical Engineering

Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (Avionics)

Aircraft Maintenance Engineering

Agriculture Agricultural Engineering
Engineering

Agricultural Technology

Architecture Architectural Assistantship

Interior Decoration

Interior Design

Biotechnology Biotechnology
Ceramic Ceramic Engineering and Technology
Engineering

Ceramic Technology

Ceramics Engineering

Glass and Ceramics Engineering

Chemical Chemical Engineering
Engineering

Chemical Engineering (Fertilizer)

Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)

Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

(
(
Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)
(
(

Chemical Engineering (Sugar Technology)

Chemical Chemical Engineering
Engineering | Chemical Technology

Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)

Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic Technology)

Chemical Technology Fertilizer

Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)

Surface Coating Technology

Technical Chemistry

Paint Technology

Oil and Paint

Technology Chemical Engineering (Oil Technology)

Chemical Technology (Paint Technology)

Petrochemical Engineering

Petrochemical Refinery

Petrochemical | Petrochemical Technology
Engineering | Petroleum Engineering

Petroleum Technology

Chemical Engineering (Petro Chemical)

Plastic and Mould Technology

| 235 | AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 271 ---
Plastic and
Polymer
Technology

Plastic and Polymer Engineering

Plastic Engineering

Plastic Mould Technology

Plastic Technology

Plastics Processing and Testing

Polymer Engineering and Technology

Polymer Technology

Plastic Process and Testing

Chemical Engineering (Plastic and Polymer)

Civil Engineering

Civil Engineering

Civil and Rural Engineering

Civil (SFS Mode)

Civil Draftsman

Civil Engineering

Civil Engineering and Planning

Civil Engineering (Building Services Engineering)

Civil Engineering (Construction Technology)

Civil Engineering (Construction)

Civil Engineering (Rural Engineering)

Civil Technology

Construction Engineering

Construction Technology

Construction Technology and Management

Geoinformatics and Surveying Technology

Geographic Information System and Global Positioning System

Quantity Surveying and Construction Management

Survey Engineering

Transportation Engineering

Environment
Engineering

Civil and Environmental Engineering

Civil (Public Health and Environment) Engineering

Civil Engineering (Environment and Pollution Control)

Civil Engineering (Environmental Engineering)

Civil Engineering (Public Health Engineering)

Civil Environmental Engineering

Civil Environmental Engineering

Environmental Engineering

Water Resources

Water Resource Management

Civil Engineering (Water Resource and Management)

Engineering
Water Technology and Health Science
Computer Science Advanced Computer Application
and Engineering Campus Wide Network Design and Maintenance
Computer Hardware and Networking
Computer Computer Applications
Science Computer Engineering
Engineering | Computer Engineering and Application

Computer Hardware and Maintenance

Computer Hardware and Networking

Computer Networking

AICTE

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 236 |
--- Page 272 ---
Computer Science and Engineering

Computer Science

Computer Science and Technology

Computer Science and Systems Engineering

Computer Software Technology

Computer Technology

Computer Technology and Applications

Cyber Forensics and Information Security

Computer Applications

Network Engineering

Web Designing

Web Technologies

Electronics and Computer Engineering

Computer Science and Information Technology

Information and Communication Technology

Information Engineering

Information Science

Information Science and Engineering

Information Science and Technology

Technlooy Information Security Management
Information Technology
Information Technology and Engineering
Information Technology Enabled Services and Management
Advanced Communication and Information System
IT. (Courseware Engineering)
Computer and Information Science
Dairy Engineering Dairy Engineering
Electrical Electrical and Electronics (Power System)
Engineering Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering
Electrical and Mechanical Engineering
Electrical and Power Engineering
Electrical Energy Systems
Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)
Electrical Engineering
Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)
Electrical Engineering (Industrial Control)
Electrical Machines
Electrical Power Systems
Power Systems Engineering
Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Electronics and Applied Electronics
Communication Digital Electronics
Engineering Electronics — , ;
Engineering Digital Electronics and Microprocessor

Digital Systems

Electrical and Electronics (Power System)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 273 ---
Electrical and Electronics Engineering

Electrical and Electronics Engineering

Electrical Engineering (Electronics and Power)

Electronic Engineering
Electronic Science and Engineering

Electronics

Electronics and Avionics

Electronics and Production

Electronics and Video Engineering

Electronics and Computer Engineering

Electronics and Electrical Engineering

Electronics Engineering

Electronics Engineering (Industry Integrated)

(
Electronics Engineering (Micro Electronics)
Electronics Engineering (Modern Consumer Electronics)

Electronics Engineering (Specialization in Consumer Electronics)

Electronics Engineering With Microprocessor

Electronics Production and Maintenance

Electronics Technology
Embedded Systems
Industrial Electronics

Micro Electronics

Power Electronics

Digital Electronics and Communication Engineering

Electronics (Fiber Optics)

Opto-Electronics Engineering

Electronics and Communication Engineering

Electronics and Communication Engineering (Industry Integrated)

Electronics and Communication Technology

Advanced Communication and Information System

Advanced Electronics and Communication Engineering

. Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
Electronics and

Communication | Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering (Technology
Engineering _ |€lectronic Radio)

Digital Communications

Electronics and Communication Engineering (Microwaves)

Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering (Radio and
System)

Electronics Communication and Instrumentation Engineering

Telecommunication Engineering

Telecommunication Technology

TV and Sound Engineering

Information and Communication Technology

Applied Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 274 ---
Instrumentation
Engineering

Automation and Robotics

Automation Engineering

Control and Instrumentation

Biomedical Instrumentation

Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering

Electrical Engineering (Instrumentation and Control)

Electronic Instrumentation and Control Engineering

Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering

Electronics (Robotics)

Electronics Communication and Instrumentation Engineering

Electronics Robotics

Industrial Electronics

Instrument Technology

Instrumentation

Instrumentation and Control Engineering

Instrumentation (E&C)

Instrumentation Engineering

Instrumentation Technology

Medical Electronics
Engineering

Bio Electronics

Biomedical Engineering

Medical Electronics Engineering

Medical Electronics

Biomedical Instrumentation

Fire and Safety
Engineering

Fire Technology and Safety

Food Engineering

Food Processing and Preservation

Food Processing Technology

Food Technology

Leather
Technology

Footwear Technology

Leather and Fashion Technology

Leather Goods and Footwear Tech

Leather Technology

Leather Technology (Footwear)

Leather Technology Footwear Computer Aided Shoe Design

Leather Technology Tanning

Saddlery Technology and Export Management

Marine
Engineering

Marine Engineering and Systems

Marine Engineering

Marine Engineering and Systems (Artificer Training)

Marine Engineering and Systems

Mechanical
Engineering

Automobile
Engineering

Automobile Engineering

Automobile Engineering (Automobile Fitter)

Automotive Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 275 ---
Mechanical Engineering Auto Mobile

Energy Systems Engineering

Heat Power Engineering

Maintenance Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (Industry Integrated)

Mechanical Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (Maintenance)

Mechanical Engineering (Refrigeration and Air Conditioning)

Mechanical Engineering Power Plant Engineering

Mechanical Engineering Tube Well Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (Repair and Maintenance)

Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical and Electrical

Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
CAD CAM
Design and Drafting

Fabrication Technology

Fabrication Technology and Erection Engineering

Foundry Technology

Industrial and Production Engineering

Industrial Engineering and Management

Machine Engineering

Machine Tools and Maintenance Engineering

Machine Tools Technology

Manufacturing Engineering

Manufacturing Technology

Material Management

Mechanical (Computer Aided Design, Manufacture and Engineering)
Mechanical CAD/ CAM
Mechanical Engineering (Automobile)

Production
Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (Tool and Die)

Mechanical Engineering Automobile

Mechanical Engineering Production

Mechanical Engineering Specialization in CAD

Mechanical Engineering Tool Engineering
Mechanical Engineering (CAD/ CAM)
Mechanical Engineering (Foundry)(SW)

Mechanical Engineering (Machine Tool Maintenance and Repairs)

Mechanical Welding and Sheet Metal Engineering

Precision Manufacturing

Production and Industrial Engineering

Production Engineering

Production Technology

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 276 ---
Tool and Die Making

Tool and Die Engineering

Tool and Die Under Mechanical Engineering

Tool Die and Mould Making

Mechatronics

Mechatronics

Robotics and Mechatronics

Metallurgy Metallurgical Engineering
Engineering Metallurgy

Metallurgy and Material Technology
Military Artificer Training (Electronics)
Engineering

Artificer Training (Electrical)

Artificer Training (Mechanical)

Armament Engineering (Gun Fitter)

Weapons Engineering

Navy Entry Artificer/ Diploma in Mechanical and Electrical

Mining Engineering

Mine Engineering

Mine Surveying

Mining and Mine Surveying

Shipbuilding Engineering

Drilling Engineering

Drilling Technology

Packaging
Technology

Packaging Technology

Printing and Packing Technology

Pharmaceutical

Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Technology

Engineering

Printing Printing and Packing Technology
Engineering Printing Technology

Pulp Technology Pulp Technology

Wood and Paper Technology

Textile Engineering

Apparel Design and Fabric

Apparel Design and Fabrication Technology

Apparel Design and Fashion Technology

Apparel Manufacture and Design

Apparel Technology

Computer Aided Costume Design and Dress Making

Costumer Design and Dress Making

Handloom and Textile Technology

Textile Technology (Man Made Fibre Technology)

Dress Designing and Garment Manufacturing

Fashion and Clothing Technology

Fashion and Design

Fashion and Apparel Design

Fashion Designing

Fashion Designing and Garment Technology

Fashion Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 277 ---
Garment Technology

Garment and Fashion Technology

Garment Design and Fashion Technology

Garment Fabrication

Garment Manufacturing Technology

Handloom and Textile Technology

Knitting and Garment Technology

Knitting Technology

Textile Chemistry

Textile Design

Textile Designing

Textile Designing Printing

Textile Engineering

Textile Manufactures

Textile Manufacturing and Technology

Textile Marketing and Management

Textile Processing

Textile Processing Technology

Textile Technology

Textile Technology (Textile Design and Weaving)

Textile Technology (Manmade Fibre)

CDDM (Costume Design and Dress Making)

Biomedical Biomedical Engineering
Engineering ECG Technology
Health Care Technology
Instruments and Medical Equipment
Medical Laboratory Technology
Ophthalmic Technology
Technician X-Ray Technology
Multimedia 3-D Animation and Graphics
Technology Animation and Multimedia Technology
Multimedia Technology
Office Management/ Accounts and Audit

Commercial Practice

Administration Services

Computer Application and Business Management

Finance Account and Auditing

Modern Office Management

Modern Office Management and Secretarial Practice

Modern Office Practice

Commercial and Computer Practice

Commercial Practice

Commercial Practice (KAN and ENG)

Rubber

Rubber Technology

Chemical Technology (Rubber and Plastic Technology)

Chemical Technology (Rubber/ Plastic)

AICTE

Fy) APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 242 |
--- Page 278 ---
Cosmetology

Beauty and Hair Dressing

Beauty Culture and Cosmetology

Cosmetology and Health

Cinematography

Applied Videography

Audiography and Sound Engineering

Cinematography

Direction Screen Play Writing and TV Production

Film and Video Editing

Film Editing and TV Production

Film Technology and TV Production (Cinematography)

Film Technology and TV Production (Film Processing)

Film Technology and TV Production (Sound Recording and Sound
Engineering)

Film Technology (Animation and Visual Effects)

Photography

Sound Recording Engineering

Hotel Management

Hotel Management and Catering Technology

Journalism
and Mass
Communication

Mass Communication

Cement Technology

Cement Technology

Engineering Engineering Education
Education

Fisheries Fisheries Technology
Technology

Home science

Home Science

Jewellery Design
and Manufacture
Technology

Jewellery Design and Manufacture Technology

Library and
InformationScience

Library and Information Science

Sugar Technology

Sugar Technology

Travel and Tourism

Travel and Tourism

Wood Technology

Wood Technology

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 279 ---
ANNEXURE-8

SUOI}N}SU] A}LAL
JOJ IQUNOD Jedia1uNyy
Ale}g HO /SUO!NIsSU|
OD Joy JUaUJedaq ealy WO a2WO ealypayljou
quauyedag| sysor1qng uewepuYy-| payl}ou 10} GMdV PadWPaYl}OU JO} JBUOISSIUIWUOD | JAUOISSILULUOD JO} GMdV | Jeqo>IN pue
SOM IIGNg UeWepuy| Ueqin JeAeYdUeY - |eEINY 4aaulbuq salud | GMdv Waeulbuz yaryD Ayndag ‘was Ayndag ‘was | “eeulbuq yaiyD uewepuy
uolbay usa}seq
yekeyrued
abe||IA 10}99]]0D
‘uoljesodso> jedisiunyw yekeyrued
JO JaUOISSILULUOD | }eAeYDUReIIF /JeEAeYDUe eyirecAeyoued Weld Jepyisyey Buluueld
“yeAeyruegd Jeben weJ5- jeny ‘webiN Buluue|d -jeuny ‘eyijedieben Jepjisyey /ayensibeyw Aayuno> pue
4yauueld| yd eben /Uoe1OdO0> | AujuNoD pue uMOL /webBin seen /UeMjed - eINY | |BUOISIAIG qns- UuMOL- |eIny ysapeld
UMo| ‘ey1/2d 1eBeN Jedisiuny-ueqin | -jeuny pue uequa /40}2a||OD-UeQIN| Uepyisyey - Uequ¢A | jeny pue uequlA pue ueqin eXypew
juawpedag
uonenjen
JO pue Jauueld
40}39|OD juawdojareq umo]-jeiny
‘uoljesodso> jedisiunyw JaDYJO JUaWdojanaq J22YO puUysig /UjUeYW ‘uolyesoduo>
JO JQUOISSILULUOD eynyel /auue|g UMOL quawudojanaq Heyey veyeueyy wind eel Jediniuny
“yeXeyrueg Jeben - Jeuny uauue|g UMOL eynyel-jeany - yeuny ‘AyUoU Ny /seyeuey - /Awouny
4auue|g UMOL | /AWOY NY JUaWUdOjaAeg ‘BUUR|d quawdojanag Jeany ‘eye 40}Da]]0D -}  JUaWdojanaq
‘eyted seBeN ueqin -ueqin uMmo| - ueqin ueqin - ueqin | eyeuey - UequA | jenypueueqin}| Uueqiq-ueqiA yeafiny
S2WO UOISIBAIG Buluueld
uolneiodioD Buluuelg Auyuno> pue Buluueld /ayensibeyy Adyuno> pue
Jediniuny ‘6uruuejg | UMOL -jeuny ‘uoIyesOdJo> | AsjUNOD pue UMOL | HuluUe|gAJ}UNOD pue uemjeg- jeuny | |eUuOoIsIAIG qns - umoL-|einy
Ayyuno> pue UMOL. Jediniuny - uequn| -jeany pue uequa | umol-jeuny pue ueqin| ‘apyisyel - uequA | jeuny pue uequ“A pue ueqin | ysebsiyeyyd

932e 412485

uonedns.9

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

uejd Buipying

URId B1S

(jeany /uequn)
uonesyisse]> pue]

ue}d Ja}seW
/uejg easeyy

932e2YI}49>
uolsiaAuoD
pue]

uolbay je1}Ua>

932224148

asn puey 3381S

sa)
qQ
N
N
So
N
x
fe}
9
(a)
(=)
Zz
<
=x
nv
n
wi
ie)
fe)
[4
a
z
>
fe)
[4
a
a
<

om

AICTE
--- Page 280 ---
Andiuewjo Andiuepjo
4edjaydweq ndiuey indiueywy Woy'‘spsodady| “AOD ‘spsoday
JO JUBWUIBAOD spsoday pue7 pue Ayyediaiuny -ueqin Andiuey jo JO ‘WOD ‘AWWoyNy pue7 pue pue7 pue
quawalyyas jo quawyedag JODO JUaWdojanag | ‘Woy ‘uawupyedag quawdojanag| juawalyjas jo} jUawayjas jo
4ODYO JUGWA}IIS 314951 ypojg -jeany Bunaauibuq | Jauoiss|wiwod D13S1q pue Buluueldg quauyedaqg juawjedag Andiuey
Panss! uolyedy!}ou
(stu}0} BUNT juawuaao6b pue
panss! uoledyijou (QW OEWAY Yond) sunf s9u3
quawusarob pue PanssIUoNe>YNOU | jd se) saquouny
(@WI} OJ ay panss!} — UONDIPsUNf 414} yuawuarob pue quawidojanaq
uoledyIjou JUBWUJ2AOb | Jad se) saloyIny uondipsunf 424} jeuolBay/webiN
pue uoldipsunf say} quawudojanaq Jad se) saljouiny seBen ‘PwIed
Jeuolbay /webiN quawdojaaaqg JeBeN ‘pesiied
quawdojanag jeuolbay JeBen ‘ex!/ed JeuoiBay /webin aeBen “eAeyoueg
/webin seben Jeben ‘pesied jeBen ‘exe seBeN seBen a1)
‘eyed seBen ‘pesueg| seben ‘yeAeyoueg “‘pesiedg weben JBUOISSILULUOD
Jeben ‘yeAeysued Jeben a‘! saipoq “yeAeydueg seben salpoq Ayndaq Aq
yeXeudued :Jeuny payenyis Jeben a"! Salpoq |e207 JeD07 - uequa ‘1 Sa1pog |e207- Je207 - ueqin pazuoyjne
1 Buipjing ay} UONDIpsUNnf{ asoym - URQUA ADLYO aD419 MAIO 22419} — URQUA) @DLYO a]DID UA2YO 2219 pueyyeur ul} 4adyJo - jeany
Japun uolnesodio> jedisiuny :uequn, /yeXeyrueg - jeany| /yeAeydueg - [ANY /yekeyrueg-jeany | /yeAeyrued -jesny} ajqerjdde jon pue uequin pueyyeur
yekeuueg ‘jeuny’e
“payenys si Buipjing ay} UoN>Ipsunf
asoym Japun uonesodso> (6urpjing) ing)
jedisjuny :uequn say0'Z (6uipying) quawyedag quawpedag aWO WO 2]DID
quaupedag sion, SOM INN -| IYO a[dulD anuanay SMIOM NNN -| a)d4ID anuanray -| anuanay -jeuny
DW) JO VOW) :oaW HeYyeMND'| | D1qQNg- jeANy pue ueqin Jeuny pue uequn -jeinypueueqin| jeuny pue uequi¢ | jeuny pue ueqin pue ueqin wessy
ysapeld
Jeyseunuy ysapeld
ysapeld JO "Woy Jeyseuniy
uoneonp® jer1uYra] pue JaYBIH Jo ayesopaiig | Ysapesd jeydeunJy Jo|jeyseunsy Jo"AoDH| ‘juawabeueyy Jo "Woy
$}2143SIG aAIadsad ay} Aq paroidde pue sjuawyedag| ‘od ‘aUOIssIWIWOD “WUOISSILULUO> puejjo} “auolssiuw0> ysapeld
34} JO JBUOISSIIWIOD Ayndaq ayL. Buraauibuq snouen Aq pasiedaidg Ayndaq Ayndaq juawyedagq Ayndaq Jeyseuniy

9389 y1}48 UoNedn>29

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

uejd Buipying

ueld 2S

(jeany /uequn)
uonesyisse|> puey

ue}d Ja}seW
/uejg easeyy

932e2YI}49>
uolsiaAuoD
pue]

932e 412485
asn puey

3783S

ra)
q
N
N
=)
Q
=<
[e}
le}
ry
a
Zz
<
=
vn
un
Ww
U
fe}
4
a
z
=>
fe)
3
a
a
<x
ih "

AICTE
--- Page 281 ---
a
N
uMmo]/juaupyedeg g
quawudojanaq S
ueqin pue PYSIPO JO | EYSIPO JO "AOD fe)
BulsnoH - PUSIPO | ‘Od ‘JuaWpedaq 4uawpyedag 4Juawyedag 4
uequn pue ueqin Jado | JO '}AOD ‘juaedag quawabeuew| juawabeuey| juawabeuey [a]
Ayyediniunyw | Buisnoy - uequa 4a2WYO quawdojaraq juawabeuey| Jaysesiq pue Jaysesiq pue Jaysesiq pue =
-uequr ijiwies yeAeyoueg — jeany | Juawidojanag yPo}g-JeuNY ypojg -Jeuny | Jay}sesig pue anuanay anuanay anuanay anuanay essuO. =
(NG) Buisnoq 4
ewyoy ‘puejeben (NGA) Md ‘“eeulbuz Auoyny Auoyny Ayuoy Ny 8
quawedag juawdojanag ueqiq)| Bulsnoy /gMd ‘PaHYUy 3ANDaxX anuanay [2207 anuanay [e207 -| anuanay e907 puejeben x
JUBWA}}9S z
quawyedaq quawayes quawyedaq 2B aNUaADY >
pausaou0D pue anuanay pueq pausa2u0D yuysig} pueq ‘Aueyasdas 9
quawpedaq ay} JO peaH *KieYIDIS “JEMZIY ay) Jo peay pausaauo) | :Jemziy apisino EF
pausauo> ay} jo yemziy apising| apising yuawayyes| = |jemziy apisino ayLJosa.yO|  awayas 9g <
peay jemziy apisino uol}e10d105 pue anuanay uol}e10d105 quawiayas :| anuaray pueq

uonesodiod jediniuny| — jedioiunyy jemziy pueq ‘Auejaias} = jedinjuny jemziy a}e 1S ay} Ul "K12YB1DS gi

JlpuNoD jediniunw jmeziy Jemziy :ueqin jemeziy rueqin jemeziy rueqin Jemeziy ruequn, jemeziy SPUISIP Iv} sUequA jemeziy WeJOZI\)
wi
Aoyny Ayuoyyny 5
Ayuouny UOISIAIG Ayuouny juawdojareq uoleonpy =z

quawdojanag ueqin ekejeybayy uolsiaig buipjing GMd Bulpling dMd| JUawdojanag ueqin ueqin /GMd -| fanuanay e207} ~— eAeyeyuBay

932e2YI}49>
(jeany /uequn) ue}d Ja}seW uolsiaAuoD 932e2YI}48>

9389 y1}48 UoNedn>29 uejq Buipjing Ue}d AUS uonesyisse|> puey /uejd easeyy puey asn puey 37k

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S
--- Page 282 ---
A\uoy Ny JUaudojanag jeuolbay /uoNesodio> jediiunyy
/yeKeurued seben /yeAeydueg Weld se yons salpoq

Je20] 84} Aq ualb si UOIssIWad sj}! pue UBIsap Bulpying
Jo eaosdde ay} ‘suolnyysuy ayeAUd Jo 49332 BY} U|

*SUOIIN}I}SU] P9UMO JUBWUJBAOD
Jo s6ulpjing 0} pazejas suaqyeww [Je Ul Sa}eDyI]49D anssi
0} Aqouyny jUa}adwod s! JuaWYedag UO!}INI}sUuOD

Bulpying ‘(D/1 PayYyauy JalyD) PeWYouy solUas SUL
yeUlg JO JUBWWAAOD “juaWedaq UO!}DNI}sUOD,

Bulpjing ay} Aq pa}dn4jsuod pue paublsap Ajl4osyndwod

*Y20]q BY} JO 492YJO 2]D4ID BAlyDadsau ay} Aq panss! aie sayedyIaD
asoy) Auedwod/}sn}/A}3190S BU} JO BWeN a4} Ul palajsiBad s| pUeT aaYM ‘SUO!N}I}SU] B}eALC Jo ased U|

‘pasinbad jou ae sazedYIYa> a}yed0Ape puke adueIquiNdud

/uolsiaAUor/asn pueq Gulpsebas ‘sayedy!1495 Os ‘UOIsIDap JaUIge> siy YGNosY} puke] sayer0]/e

‘y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

J SUOIINPISU] PAUMO JUBWIUJBAOD |[e JO Hulpjing | — JUBWIUJAAOD 9}e}S BY} ‘HUET JUBLWLJIAOH UO SUOI}NJSU] PAUMO JUPLUWBAOD }e}s JO UO!}INI}SUOD 104 seulg
uolbay usayON
Ayoyuyny jUuawdojaraq
/Ayyedin1unw
/UolyeJOdJOD - ebay]
/OBW AWOUNY
juawudojaaeqg
/Ayedioiunw
pay pasaysibay Ayoyyny JUaUdojarsq /uolyesodio> - (UT (u1°3 puet)
/A\uouyny Juawdojanag} = /Ayediniunyy /uonesodio> - ebay /o1aW\ ueqinpeusuede||iZ pueq) wav- way -eba;w
/Ayjedioiuny /uolyesodso5- Aoy ny Uawdojanag /Ayeda1uNyy 413 puey) WaV ‘EDLYO BAINIaxq pue | ebay/oneaw (YT) — /OAI@W (YTB
OujaW/eba; ‘UequN PeyYyuy | /UONesodJOD - UeqIN peysied eIIIZ HE2YO| - eBay /oaW (YI Wd /peysied el|!Z 3 puel) Wav puey) Wav
pasaysibay Yyym yeXeyrued Wesd aAINDaXy pue WC /peysied eliZ /W!wWes |Z pueT) WaY-"eqUN /muues yeAeyrued —uedin OY —ueqin OY
PpausJa2UOd ay} Jo UeYpeld - |eANY yekeyrued /yakeyoueg WRID-jeINy] OY] pPUeTg-JeINy| /JaXeyoUeg WeID-jeIny] pueqg-jeiny] pueqg-jeiny| jebuag yay
AHL dMd Aoyny Ayuoyny
[PpuNod jediniuny ejeyeby /OMd ‘PanYyry | 4“aau!Huz aayndaxZ anuanay [e907 | AWoyY Ny anuanay |e307 YN] anuaray je207 eunduy.
juawupedaq
quawdojaaeq
ueqin /Buisnoy| — yauIsIq aAIjDedsau puUjsig ayy puUjsig ayy
WIyyIS ‘JUaWyedag BulsnoyH pue Buipying JO GQYH 24} JO | 39143S1q aANDadsaJ Jo JUIsIG aANIadsai} jo JUaWedaq | jo JUaWedag
pue quaudojanag ueqin| 4saeuibuz jeuoisiaig | 4saeuibuq |euoisiaig | 2}@410}3a]|OD }Du4S1G JO 3}210}39]/0D }DU}SIG} aNuaAaeypuey| aeNuaAay pueqT WIS
Auoy ny
quawdojaaeq
/Buluue|g UMOL Ayuoyny
/juawyedaqg juawudojareg
quawdojaaeq /Buluueld RYSIPO JO “OD

93e2YI}495 UoNednr29

uejd Buipying

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

URId B31S

(jeany /ueqin)
uonesyisse]> puey

93e 24148
uolsiaAuo>
pue]

ueld
Jaysey /ue}d e’seyy

332e2Y1195
asn puey

wi
=
S
<
--- Page 283 ---
AoyNY

Ayuouny jedisiunw,
ANUaAaY 3321S Aysoyuny /A\uou ny
yekeyrued yekeyrued /Nuoyiny Jediniuny| = yuawdojanaq
BIZ /Ayouny eZ /Auoyny juawdojareq Ayoyyny anuarsy /Ayouyny | /Juawyedaq
Buruueld Aunod gy UMOL |} JediniuNW /AWWoUINyY | jedis1uNW /AWWOYINY /uawyedag) /AWoy ny Juawdojaneaqg| Uawdojaraq Buluueld
Jo JUaWedag auUOIssIWWOD| anuaray /AWWoYINY| anuaray /AWoyny|  GHuluue|gAyjunoD| /uUaWedag Buluueld /Aysouny Adjuno> pue
4oyessSIUILUpY Jaly> quawdojaaeq juawdojareq pue umoL Ayyuno> pue UMOL. anuanay umo,| yebipuey>
uolbay usa}sa\y\ YON
juauyedag
Buruueg ueqin
pue bulsnoy
yekeyrued seen yeAeyrued /Aysouyny
elIr /peysuied ex!|ed 1e6eN jediniunw
‘uolesodio jediniunyy PUIsIG Ayuoyyny /Aou ny
Aq J2DYJO P2}LUILON JO JBDLYO Jediniuny| = yuawdojareq
BAINIAXA /J9PYO AINIaXq JalyD yekeyrued yekeyruedg} Ayoy Ny anuaray Aoy Ny anuarsy /Aywsouyny | — /JuaWyedaq
Aou ny Juawdojareq PuUIsIG eZ /Ayoyiny e117 /Auoyny ayeys /Auoyny | /Ayoy ny yuatudojanag| juawdojaneq Buluueld
Aq 422YJO P2CUILUON JO J2DLYO | [ediniuny /Awouyny | jedisiuny /Ayou ny | yUawudojanag /Ue|d /uawyedag Buruue|d /Aysouyny Aayuno> pue ysapeld
BAINIAXA /J9PYO AINIaXq JalyD quawdojaaaq juawdojaraq Jayseyy pue UMOL Adyuno> pue UMOL. anuanay UMOL Jenin
uonsipsune
uonipsunr| diay} Jad se webin
Jayyiad se webin | Jeben /ex!]eq webeN
seBben /eylyeg sebeN /peysued seBben uonoipsune
/peysued seben /yeKeyruedieben | 1184} Jad se Webin JebeN
/yekeyrued ‘al salpog e207} —/ey!ed seben /peysied
Jeben ‘a1 salpog JO gq - ueqin deben /yeAeydued
uonnysu| Je907 Jo dq - uequn eben ‘3'! sa1pog
$0 J0}DaIIQ /edioulg UON WSU] Ja2YO J2007 Jo dq - uequn
JUAWUJAAOD JOY Jepyisyay. JaDYJO JUaWdojanaq quawdojanag
/ayeaysiBeyw |euoisiaig qns - jenny abHellA /422YO abHellA /422YO JaDYJO JUaWdojanaq
Ao Ny JUaWdojarag -ueqiA|| AdUaby uo dNsysUOD yeheyruegabe|liA yeAeyrued abel|iA A22YO
UOIINPSU] ALA g/2DULUIY JJaS 104 pausaau0D —yeany abeyiA-}eany) yeAeyoueg abel, - eany | WGS pausaouo | WS pewisdu0D| pueyyesenn

38} yI}419> UoedNI29

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

ue}d 6ulpying

UeId AS

(Jeany /uequn)
uoneyisse]> puey

ueld
Jaysey /ue]d eiseyy

ae 2y119D
uolssaauo>
puey

32e241249
asn puey

3783S

sa)
qQ
N
N
So
N
x
fe}
9
(a)
(=)
Zz
<
=x
nv
n
wi
ie)
fe)
[4
a
z
>
fe)
[4
a
a
<

om

AICTE
--- Page 284 ---
fq

panoiddeg ayy oag/Auoyiny
Aq paedaig-jeiny| anuaray Aq paroidde 9
Ayoyyny anuansy payyry Aq paredaig - anuansy anuansy anuansy
/Muouny jediiunyw | jeany AWoy ny anuarsy JUOISSILULUOD JBUOISSILULUOD,
JBUOISSILULUOD, Aq paroidde} = /Ayuouyny jediniunyy Aq quejysissy - jeuny anuanay JaUOIssILULUO> quejysissy - jeiny
Ayndag-jeiny pue papyry Aq} =paaoidde pue yaWYIy Ayyediaiuny quejsissy -/euny anuaray J@UOISS|LULUOD, Ayjedioiunyw HyVvaV1
Ayyedisiunyw -ueqin paredaig — uequn Aq pasedaig - uequn -URqIP) | JBUOISSILULUOD JURJSISS\W-URQUA Ayndag -ueqin -ueqin er
uoljeiodioD
Jediniuny
‘JQUOISSILULWOD J[EYaq
uo JaUUe|d
paopyay uoleiodioD
Jediniunyy a!)
seaily ueque ul
pue Aqouiny
quaudojanag ealy
Jeisads ul Auejasas
Jaquiay pue
yeAeyrued seben
JO $9a}}IWUWUOD eae
Jediaiunyw ul 42240 pausaau0> jo
SAIINIAXJ Ysepeld Pale pausJaUOD JO Ayuouny
Jeyrdeuy} ‘pueyy Ayuoyiny jedisiunyy
puyjsig Yebeusapuns Pade pausaduo> anuandy a}e1S /Muouny
‘ysapeld |eYIeWIH Jo yeAeyrued eae /Ayouny Pale pausaduo0D jo] jUualudojaraq
JO "Woy ‘uoNenpy eZ /Auouny | + pausJadUO> Jo yeAeydued quawdojareg] eae pauladuo> jo Ayoy ny | AWou ny jediniunyy} = /uawyedaq
Jediuyra, jo} yediniunyw /Aywouny | e!Z /AWoyyny jediniunjw /uawyedag anuanay a}e3s /AWUOUINY /Muouny Buluueld
ayesopaiig| anuaray /AWWou Ny /AWou ny anuaray Buluueld quaudojanag /juawpedaq juawdojanaq Ayyuno> ysapeld
‘4OJDBIG YL quawdojanag | /AWWoyyny Juawdojaraq Ayyuno>'3 UMOL, Buluuelg AuyUNOD 9 UMOL| /AWWOYUINY anuaray QUMOL]| |eYeWIH
uonsanb ul ays ay} Uo Uodn bulpuadap ‘buluue|g A1UNOD > UMOL 10}931G
puesuueld UMO] JOIUaS W@UUL|d UMOL D1}SIG BAI}DadsaJ SI Says payUeJB (yD YoNs JOy sue} Hulpjing Jo Uo!UeS JO} AJWOUINY JUa}adWO>D
dU! "e/NyYDUeg EULA} ‘salpog |eD07 UGA 1091 YUM S}SAA ‘SHUI [|EdIJUNYy AY} UIYUM Huljjey sease BY} JOJ UOISSILad JUeIH 0} slamod
7eY} Bday PaUO!UaW YOM os]e SI }]"(@UOZ BNYNIUHe Ul suOIINzYsU] |eEUOHeINpPy jo dn Huljjas 404 uolssiwusad 7D UeIH 0} UOH}ejNbas Huluoz
euekiey AY} Ul UOISIAOJC OU SI 34943) SUL|g JUBUdOJaAap aAI}DadsaJ Jo UOe|NBas Buluoz ay} Hulxejas Jaye “AOD ayy Aq pajuesb aie uolssiuad yons
“‘eInyyoueg ‘eueAJeyH | auoz jeun}jnd146e ay} ul searaym ‘eueAeY Huluueld AJUNOD 9g UMOL 410}Da/1G Aq pa}UesB SI seaye UeGIN Jo UOZ HulWUYUOD ay} Ul SUOI}NYISU|
JO ‘WAOD ‘Juawpedeq Jeuolesnpy jo dn Burjjas 404 uolssiwad asn pueq jo abuey> ay! “ease jeund se paylsse|> aq Aew auoz ainyjndube ay} ul ym Burjyjey eave
uoneonpy jea1uyray. Pa]]04]U0D au} Jo Ved ‘seasaym ‘eae paylsse|> aq UeD Ue|q JUBWIdOJaAap Jo aUOZ ajqeZIUeUN UIYUM s|jey YDIYM ‘eae Pa|jOs}UOD 9y} Jo ed
“JRIQUAD 10}3211G PUL EIGL JO Ly JDL JO UOISIAOJC BY} JB@PUN PaiejIaP RaJe Pa}|O4JUOD UIYIM Pa}edO] Be YIIYM ‘Sais BY} 10} AJUO Paule}qo aq 0} pasinbas ae
aul suolssiwuad 71D Yyrns ‘eueAJeH Jo aje}s BY} Ul SUOIINIJSU] |eUOI}eEINPy Jo dn Huryas 104 suolssiusad 1D Jo JUeIH J0y AyOU Ny JUa}adwioD eueKley

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

ra)
q
N
N
=)
Q
=<
[e}
le}
ry
a
Zz
<
=
vn
un
Ww
U
fe}
4
a
z
=>
fe)
3
a
a
<x

AICTE
--- Page 285 ---
Peale pausJadU0>D

JUIWUIBAOD

- 319e GZ aAoge
ease ue Bulinseaw
pafoid e J04

*JUaWIWaAOD

- Ray Buruueld
J2207] P2ylqON /Ue|d
Jaysey Yeup ayy
UIYUM s}[ey UIs

41 ‘Saude ¢Z 0}. dn
ease ue Bulnseatu

ayy so (Awou;ny pafoud e 404
quawdojarag Woy zu 000 aroge “ue|d
paseysind| 6bulpjing ay} yo eae Jayseyy payijou
puey J!) Ayoyny | ue soy qefung “auUe|d zu 0005 UIYUM s{]eJ ays
quawidojareg | UMO] Ja!4D 7WO00S ng jo eave SU} JI ‘Saude GZ Jo
/aaywwoy 0} dn Burinseaw ue Joy qefung WauUe|d eaye ue Bulunseaw Buluue|d
Jediniuny)| 6Hurpying ay} yo eave UMOL J9!YD 7W O00S pafoud e 10) qefung Adjuno> pue
/uolyesodio> ue 10) ‘Buruuejg | oydn Bunseaw Buipying Buluueld “‘Buluue|d Ayjuno> UuMOL
Jedini1uny eave AyUNoD pueumoL| jo ease ue JOY ‘HuluUe|g| A1jUNOD pue UMOL pue umo, | ‘juawyedaqjo
uequn ul pue ease “Wuawupedag jo Ayyuno> pue UMOoL “Wuawpyedaqjo Buluue|g Auyuno> pue quawyiedaq jo Jauueld
PausadU0D ay} Jo Jauue|q UMOL| ‘jUaLUJedag Jo JaUUe|d JauUe|d UMOL) UMO] ‘JUaLUJedag JO JaUUe|d JauUe|g UMOL UuMO] }9114S1G
Jepyisyay eave jeans u| Joluas aAladsay | UMOLJOIUaS aAI}Dadsay | D14}SIG aANIadsay UMO] PLIsSIG aAIDadsay] JOIUaS aAIDadsay aANoadsay qefung
!yjed 142d !yled
Iyjaqjo uonesrodio> lyjed Jo uonesodioD jo uonesodiod| jo uonesodioD
ALI ‘(6uluueld) Jediniunw/ydqajo | JO UoesoduoD jedia1unw lediniunw/¥dd | !yjaq JO UoesodsoD jedinjunyw | jedia1unyw/vaqje | Jed !1unw/yaa
40}3a41G UIOF JBUOISSIUUOD |  /YQC JO J@UOISSILULUOD |} JO JBUOISSILULUOD, /YGQ Jo JauOoIssIWUWUO> JBUOISSILULUOD | JO JAUOISSIWWOD| 14jaq MEN
oadg
/Quouny enuaray

ded yI}aD

uoledn229

uejd Buipying

URId B1S

(jeany /ueqin)
uolesyisse|>

puey

ue}d Ja}seW; /ue|d e’seyy

ded yI}aD
uolssaAuo> puey

a7e2y 1485
asn puey

37e1S

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

sa)
qQ
N
N
So
N
x
fe}
9
(a)
(=)
Zz
<
=x
nv
n
wi
ie)
fe)
[4
a
z
>
fe)
[4
a
a
<

—

AICTE
--- Page 286 ---
AyWouny (ease puey ul

Ayyediaiunw wrbs g191 = eybig | juawdojanag [e207 (ease puej) Bulpuadaq)

/uolye1odso> /LIN/e4!ed 4e6eN ul Bulpuadaq) ‘WOD a}e}S
jedisiunyy aueyay /peysied seben yidaq Ayoy ny *WAOD a}e1S /oas eary jeuny
/webin Jeben | 7'0 = w'bs 9p0p - Bude | /webin seben "OD a}e1S |e207| /OdS/10}>2a]|0D /40}22||0D jo ased ul

Ayouyny (ease puey ul

Ayyediaiunw wrbs g191 = eybig | juawdojanag [e207 (ease puej) Bulpuadaq)

/uolyesodio> /LIN/e4! ed 4e6eN Jauue|d}| ul Buipuadaq) "OD 9}e1S
jediniunyy aueyay /peysied seben ydaq uMOL *WAOD a}e1S /oas| easy ueqin
/webin Jeben | 7'0 = w'bs 9p0p - Bude | /webin seben oN ayes} — /10}9]]0D | /OGS/10}2a]|0D /40}22||0D jo ased ul

3322413495
Aduednd09

uwrbs 0}
uolsiaAuo>

nun
puey

buipying

ueld
ue|d 21S

Jeany/ueqin)
pue7jo
uol}edyIsse]>

ueld

Ja\sey/ueld

eiseyy

ayedyIyeD

uolsianuoD

puey

a7e2YI}195
asp puey

Realy yo adh

ueyjsefey

3781S

9NPJSU] DJEAL *Z

wrbs g19| = eybig | WOO) WAV/WS / 40}99/|0D

ayNysul ay} Jo jediuud SAW/DCUYSY Aq payjoyje Uo! eA}SIUILUpY
/Ayyedisiuny /uonesodio> aepey| /GMd JO NaxX Jaeulbuy adag} Auouiny s| puej se puysig Aq saya]| eay jeuny
Jediniuny /webinseben| = '0 = W'bs op Oh — asd | | JaIYD 10 PaPYDIy JalyD "AOD 9321S Je07} = ‘auinbai jon quawjoyy puey} jo ased uy

wrbs g19| = eubig | Mod] WAV/WOS / 40}92||05
ayNyysu] ayy Jo jedioug SAW/DQYSY Jauueld Aq payoye uo}}e4}s!UlLUpYy eoy
/Ayyediaiunyw /uoresodso> areyay | /GMd JO NaX Jaeulbuy ydeq umol sI puel se youysig Aq sayay | uequn jo
Jediniuny / webiny seben v0 =Wbs 9p0p - 21De | | JaIYD JO Day Jalyd ‘WON a}e}S] /10}3a|]0D] ‘auinbas JON juawjojy pueq ase U|

93e2y1)48D A2uedn>29

0} UOISABAUOD

urbs yup

puey

ueld
bulpying

ueid
aus

Jeany/ueqin)
pue7jo
uoneryisse]>

ued

soysew
/ueld

eiseyy

ae 2y119D
uolssaAuo>
pue]

9382 YI}aD asp puey]

ealy
joadhy

*y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

ueyjsefey

9}N}}SU] JUDWIUABAOD *L

wi
=
S
<
--- Page 287 ---
(euebuejay
pue eiypuy Yi0q
JO} ajqeridde si
OZ6L Jequiaydas
uyZ UO panss! >

Buluue|g UMOL Bale
eiypuy) ysapedd
euypuy Aq umop

ple] Suoipuod ayy

0} palqns ‘buipjing

yUaWWaA0D
0} ajqeoijdde salpog [e207 Jo
you si yeAeyrued | UewuIeYD /Y@UOISSIWIWOD
peqesaphy wuesd) yekeyrued aanradsay sawiayrs He
ueUy a4} wel AWoyNy dD pauoljaues aay nN
sease Joj| JUaWdojanag ueqin ‘Aoyine aalyndaxq eo
Buluueld | JaAaaYM eae JWHD Je207 /yeAeyoueg WeI5 N
AyunoD JO} J9UOISSILULUOD, /jediaiunyy :syeway seale Jay}O 5
pueumo,| jediniuny :syieway saipo ul sjesodoid sawayrs rs)
Jo ayesoydaiig}| yeAeydueg wWes5 Jo {poq sease JY} Ul sjesodoid | (pue] JUaWUJaAOD du Aq paianod ealy a
4o}Ja1Ig pue} AyWoUNY aANIaxyZ fe20] ued /WOWH S@WAYIS dL Aq pasaAod ealy| 0} a]qed1|dde JON) pue (uejg Ja}se\/\) (=)
2
(WN) Jebuereny, /Kpog je207 Yan dd pue(ue|d Jajseyy) aways ‘pue7sayjo 0} + alwayos BuluueR|g UMOL <x
“peqeiapkH ul UBWUIeY> 321, (lao Buluuejg UMOL |eIaUay] pueq jeunynouby JesaUay pauoloues <=
JO} eae DWHD Ul dAINDAXq pue |INUNO>D) snsuad Jad | pauolsues Janaiay :syseway JO UOIsJaAUOD JaAUIYM ‘syJeWay A
4JBUOISS|LULUOD, JBUOISSILULUOD | ALOU NY aAINIaxq [eI07| se :syseWay ddd puno> jedisniunw ddd rsyseuay OGY (OYW) OGY dDLG}| euebuejay a
seaie 19Y}0 2
Joy AyUoY Ny a
quajadwo> =
2ui Ss! s
Buluueld 9
Aauno> a
pue umo, jo sease Ja4y}O =
aye10}a11G ul sjesodoid sawayrs
40}2J1 . ((pueq dud Aq pasanodealy 2
/Ayediiunw) dd1d'€ e007 ued selpog sease J9Y}0 Ul sjesodoid JPUDWUJIAOD 0} pue (ue|d Jajsey) Br
/uolyesodio>D van} !P0T¥edin WAX *€ SOWAIY SLD Aq pasaAod ealy ajqerijdde jon)} aways buruuejg UMoL
Jedisiuny yo} YP YeWUIEYD eI °c ddl ‘z pue (uejg Jase) away rs “pue] 4ayjo 0} Je1auay pauoloues k=
JOUOISSILULUOD ease uolje1odioD (422WYO snsua> Buluuejg UMOL|eaUaDH| = pueq jeunynouby JaAadayM ‘syseway o)
se yons Jedisiuny ul SAI]NDaXq pue |1INuNOD) Jad se :syseway | PauO!DUeS JAaAZIBYM :syseWaYy JO uolsJaAUOD| OYW /OGY /UOHeJOd10D ysapeld <x
salpoq [e207] JOUOISSILULUOD “| | AWOUINY BAI{NDaxq [2907 OYW/dD1G | [!2uNoD jedis1unw /yGN /dDLG ssyweay OGY] Jedin1unw /YGN/ ddd euypuy

uol bay |e4;U9a> YyINoS

(jeany /uequn)
93e2yI}a> uoljesyisse}> 93e 24148

uonedns29 uejq Buipjing ue}d ais puey ued Ja}sey /Ue|q eASeyYy =: UOISJ2AUOD pue] —9} BD YJ!}.49D Bsn pueq a7e1S

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S
--- Page 288 ---
Aayuno 9

‘y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

bale pausadu0d juauyedag Pade pausau0d umol /Auoyny juawpyedag
jo yeAeyrued abelli\ Buluue|d JO a2WJO JUaWUyedaq juawudojanaqg 92 UMOL |] D1}SIG aAI}DadsaI Buluueld
/Ayediniuny AdunoD 9 UMO]L | BuluUe}g Al}UNOD 99 UMOL Buluueld /uawyedag Aaains puey JO 10}9a}]05 | AyUN0D 7g UMOL e0D
ueweq ueweg
“yaUUe|g UMOL ueweqg ueweqg ‘1033||0D nig
ayepossy | ‘wauUe|g UMO] ayeIDOSsSY 4aUUR|g UMO] ajeldossy | UeWeG Yep}e|We) Ayndaqg| pue ueweg
uolbay Usa}say\
Apog Apog
|e207 pausadu0D ayy Buruuejg UMOL ]e207 /422YO
Jo Aleyai.as /Apog |2207 ‘peaH Apog [2207 ‘peaH Bujuue|g UMOL Apog |e207 ‘peaH| = 410};9a]]0D PUIsIG Jepyisyey ejeray
fpoq “paiduaxe
|e207 pausaduo0> eq 0} puey
. Woy ‘AWOYINY
‘AOU NY Buruue|d
Buluueld Jediniunyy
Jediniunyy /Muouny
/Quoyiny Buluueld
unwed /Auoyny
Apog |e207 pausa2uoD quauido}3nog Apog [207 pause2u0) quawdojareq
yekeyoueg Kpoq ‘AuoyINY uequn ‘|eany) g 4 uot ura nd
wes [2209 /Apoq [e207] peuso>uo> Buluueld jediniunyy Ayouiny Buluue|d miaueld leepunin//auony Buluue}d
[207] pausja2u0> ‘yeAeyoueg | /AUoU Ny BuluueRd-jeiny | jediiunyw Buyuue|d/AoyIny ‘paydwuaxa edpiun
° ° ~ dojanag ueqin - ;eun 2q 0} pueq ‘AOD lea1oiuny)
(ayedyiyeD weid/Apog [e307 Auouyny /Auouny JUSLUGOJEAeq UeqIf) - |eANY q /Auouny
uol}a|dWoD bulpying) ueqin :jeiny Buluueyg jediniuny Buluue|g Auouny “quawyedaq Buluueld
yeAeyrued wWesd-|2907 Kpog /Aouny Buluueld /Auouny Buluuejld jediniunyw/AWUoUNy anuanay - juny /Auouny
Apog |e207 Jeany /Apog Je07 Jeany/Apog | /AWWoUNy JUuaUdojavaq juawdojanaq Buluueg/AWUOUNY quawyedag}| juawdojanaq
Jed07] ueqin-ueqin | jeD07 UeqUA - UeqUA uequn-ueqin ueqin- ueqin| Uawdojanag ueqin- ueqin,| anuanray-Ueqin | UeqUA- UeqIN eyejeusey
uolbay usa}sayy yNoS
leuuay  UeY} Jay}O
sease 10} Buluue|d
Ayyuno> pue uMoL, Jepsjiyey
JO 9}e10}3911g pue Buluueld /422WO
leuuayd 40} YGWD|  Aunod pue umoL Buluuelg AuyunoD Jepyisyel /A22WYO JeuoIsIAIg
‘RAPS JOQuua|\| jo Juauyedag |) pue umo] jo Juawyedaq JODO aaljesjsiuiupy abe||!/\, anuaray} npen jiwey
ayew pue weuer
“yeylesey ‘ABYIIPUOg Jepsjiyey
-juawpedag Buluueld /422UO
Buruue|d Aujuno> AyUNOD pue UMOL Buluuelg AuyunoD Jepyisyel /A22WYO JeuoIsIAig
pue umo, jo Juauyedag |) pue umo] jo Juawyedaq Jepyisyel | J@24YO aanesjsiulpy abej|IA | |EUOISIAIG BNUZAaY anuanray} Aiaysipuodg

9}2e2yI18
uonedns.9

uejd Buipying

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

UeId AS

(jeany /ueqin)
uolesyisse|>
puey

ue}d Ja}SeW /Ue|d eASeYyH

93ey1418>
UOIsJ2AUOD puey

uolbay usayynos

a7e2y 1485
asn puey

wi
=
S
<
--- Page 289 ---
2WyLZLLOL = Hed | WU BEE L = eYBg | {WW 98'OhO = ADV L ‘WW OOOO! = B1e}29H LSPA) UOISIBAUOD

“aLUeS BY} JO}

paonpoid aq 0} aney [JeYs 23215 PaUJaIUOD 34} Jo AseJasdas jedioug ay} WO, 19}}3] UOI}EZLOYINe Ue ‘AWUOUINY JUaJadwWOD ay} Ul aBUeYD Aue Ss! a1ay} 4] ‘saWoUNe
B}LIS BY} WO PaUle}qo/a|qe|IEAe UOIJEWOJU! BY} JO }SAq BY} 0} YOOGpURH Ssad0Iq [eAOIddy ay} Ul Pajidwod si salOYINY JUa}@dWOD jo jsI| BAOge aU! :a30N

3a}!WWOD ay} a1oyaq JUeDI|ddy ay} Aq padnpoid aq JsNW (QD) JaPJO “OD ay} Jo Adod ‘jeAeyrued

JO ased Ul ‘JON

uoleJodio jediniunw peqeaphyp Ja}eaD DWH) ‘Aoy ny Juawdojanag ueqin yan ‘Ajouiny Juawdojanag uep|Odolay) peqes@PAH YOWH

JADJO anuanay jepUueW) OYW Ua2DLYO [eUOISIAIG anuaAay OGY Ua2YO Buruuelg AsJUNOD pue UMO|L Jo 3}e10}9911G dDLG

yekeyrued juawyedag
yekeyrued seben Buruuejg UMOL yekeyrued
yekeurued weip/yeXeyrued | /ex!|eq 1ebeN yekeyrueg] = /sepyisyey/yeAeyoued Jeben/eyijed seben | yeAeyoued JeHeN/ey!|ed ealy jeuny
JeBen/exi|ed se6eN Jeben/exied seBen | /uoierodio> JeBen eyed seBeN JeBben/eyiedg eben /uolyeiodio> JeBben/uoijyerodio> | ~pue ueqin -
/uolyesodio> jediaiuny | /Uonesrodso> jediniuny Jediniuny | /uonesodiod jediaiuny | /uorjerodso> jediaiuny Jediaiunj/10}3a]]0D IUNW/10}9a}|0D | eaWYSereYyeYy
Ayoyiny
juawdojaneaq
Ayuoyuiny Jeuolbay Ayuoyny Aysoyyny | Awouny Juawdojanag | Auouny juaWdojaneg
AWoU Ny JUaWdojareq quawdojanag | ueyWodojay juawudojaaeqg quawdojarag| jeuoibay uewodosjayy | jeuoibay uew}odo.ayy
JeuolBay ueyjodoyay | jeuoibay uewodosjay | /uoNesodiod| jeuoibay uewodoujay| jeuoibay uepodoujay /uolyesodio> /uolye10dio> olay
/uolyesodso> jediaiuny | /uoijesodio> jediniunw Jediniuny | /uonesodiod jediaiuny | /uorjerodso> jediaiuny Jediaiunj/10}3a]]0D Jedia1uny/10}29]|05 | - eujysereyey

3322412485 Uo}ednd29

ease
PaUsJ9dUOD JO DDLYO

uej}d Burpjing

UeId 23S

quawyedag buluue|d

(jeany /ueqin)
uoneyisse]> puey

juauyedag
Buluue|g Aijuno>

ue} Ja3seW
/uejg easeyy

332e2 YI} 18
uolssaAuo> puey

9322YI}495 asn puey

3783S

Bulpjing /pue ay} 0} adsay YIM Sa}edYI}185 aNss! 0} salyOY Ny JUa}adWIOD asi 3323S

sa)
a
N
N
°
N
x
°
°
Pe)
(=)
z
<
=x
nv
n
wi
U
fe)
i
a
z
>
fe)
3
o
a
<

om

AICTE
--- Page 290 ---
ANNEXURE-9

Guidelines for the Appointment of Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Persons
from Industry in AICTE approved Technical Institutions

1. INTRODUCTION: To improve the employ ability of students, industrial exposure shall be provided by
appointing Adjunct Faculty/ Resource persons in Technical Institutions. However, for computing the
Faculty deficiency only regular Faculty shall be counted.

2. OBJECTIVE: The key objective of these guidelines is to develop a useful and viable collaboration between
the Educational Institutions and Industry. The guidelines seek to enhance quality of Education and skills
by the involvement of academicians, scholars, practitioners, policymakers in teaching, training, research,
and related services on a regular basis and to attract distinguished individuals who have excelled in their
field of specialization.

3. DEFINITION: Adjunct Faculty is hired by an Institution to teach but is not a full member of the Faculty.
Adjunct Faculty is a Part Time or contingent instructor. There are academicians, professionals whose
primary employment activity is out side the Institution and who are not interested in seeking full-
time appointment with the Institution, but shall contribute to teaching in the Technical Institutions/
academic Programmes. The Adjunct Faculty shall be an eminent Professional/ Scientist/ Engineer having
recognition at the national/ international Level and having outstanding published work.

4. QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE: An Adjunct Faculty/ Resource person shall be a Faculty retired from
Technical Institution or a person of eminence, with or without a Post Graduate or Ph.D. qualifications
having 10 to 15 years of experience from Industry/ Organization. There shall be no upper age limit for
Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Person as long as he/ she add value to the Education and academic activities
of the Institution. He/ She shall satisfy the followingnorms:

Teaching and research Organizations of State/ Central government Institutions/Universities
Central and State Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs)
Reputed Industries

Civil servants (IAS/ IPS/ Officials from Central and Provincial Services) and Professionals and
Officials from professional Councils

NRIs working with reputed overseas academic, research and industrial Organizations or having
a demonstrated interest in Indian issues.

5. LIMITATION: Following are the restrictions for engaging the Adjunct Faculty.

In an Academic Year, an Adjunct Faculty shall work in 2 Institutions (maximum). The weightage of the
Adjunct Faculty in each Institution shall be in proportion to the number of Institutions he/ she is working
in. For example, For example, if an Adjunct Faculty is working in 2 Institutions simultaneously, his/ her
weightage in each Institution shall be 50%.

At the time of engagement as Adjunct Faculty in any of the Institution, the resource person has to submit
a declaration on the number of Institutions he/ she has been appointed as Adjunct Faculty in the current
Academic Year.

Any resource person receiving grants under “Adjunct Faculty Scheme” from AICTE cannot work as
Adjunct Faculty in other Institutions.

6. STRENGTH OF ADJUNCT FACULTY: In case of Planning-30% and Design-20%, Adjunct Faculty/ Resource
Persons are permissible, since the Programme requires exhaustive practical field exposure. In all other

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 291 ---
Programmes, ONLY under exigent conditions such as relieving/retirement of Faculty members/ delay
in Faculty recruitment, Institutions may avail the services of Adjunct Faculty/ Resource Persons up to
a maximum of 10% of the required Faculty members as per the “Approved Intake’, for a period not
exceeding one Academic Session.

FUNCTIONS: Functions of Adjunct Faculty/ Resource person from Industry are:

Teaching Technical Course(s): Adjunct Faculty shall be expected to teach Course(s) directly related to his/
her specific expertise and professional experience or the areas of his/ her specialization. He/ She shall
also contribute to the Institution’s activities like counselling of students, developing new Course(s) and
pedagogical improvements.

Participation in service-related activities: Adjunct Faculty is also expected to actively participate in
service-related activities, such as sitting on Departmental Committees, serving as advisors to Faculty
and/ or Under Graduate and Post Graduate students, helping students network and active collaboration
with the Industry/ Employer providing internship and job opportunities.

TA/ DA AND HONORARIUM: The Adjunct Faculty shall work at the host Institution for a minimum of 02
days per visit. TA/ DA, Honorarium, and other facilities provided to Adjunct Faculty, as per UGC guidelines,
shall be:

Travel cost, as per entitlement, from place of stay to Institution and back, maximum 6 times per Academic
Year. No accommodation would be permissible, however, free lodging and boarding in the guest house.

An honorarium of =1000/- only (Rupees One Thousand Only) per lecture up to a maximum of 24000/-
(Rupees Four Thousand only) per day of service, subject to a maximum ceiling of 780000/- (Rupees
Eighty Thousand only) per month.

Other facilities such as Office Room, Secretarial Services, depending on their involvement in academic
activities, shall be considered.

APPOINTMENT: Their appointment shall be made by a Competent Authority, based on the
recommendations of a Committee. The period of their empanelment shall vary between six months to
three years.

MONITORING: The performance of every Adjunct Faculty shall be monitored at the end of the assignment
based on the“Performance Report” submitted to the host Institution for continuation/ renewal oftenure.

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 292 ---
ANNEXURE-10

Mandatory Disclosures
The following information shall be given in the information Brochure besides being hosted on the Institution's
official Website.
The onus of the authenticity of the information lies with the Institution ONLY and not on AICTE.
1. Name of the Institution
+ Address including Telephone, Mobile, E-Mail
2. Name and address of the Trust/ Society/ Company and theTrustees
+ Address including Telephone, Mobile, E-Mail
3. Name and Address of the Vice Chancellor/ Principal/Director
+ Address including Telephone, Mobile,E-Mail
4. Name of the affiliating University
5. Governance
+ Members of the Board and their brief background
+ Members of Academic Advisory Body

Frequently of the Board Meeting and Academic Advisory Body

Organizational chart and processes

Nature and Extent of involvement of Faculty and students in academic affairs/improvements

Mechanism/ Norms and Procedure for democratic/ good Governance

Student Feedback on Institutional Governance/ Faculty performance

Grievance Redressal mechanism for Faculty, staff and students

Establishment of Anti Ragging Committee

Establishment of Online Grievance Redressal Mechanism

Establishment of Grievance Redressal Committee in the Institution and Appointment of
OMBUDSMAN by the University

Establishment of Internal Complaint Committee (ICC)

Establishment of Committee for SC/ST

Internal Quality Assurance Cell

6. Programmes
+ Name of Programmes approved by AICTE
+ Name of Programmes Accredited by NBA
+ Status of Accreditation of the Courses

+ — Total number of Courses
No. of Courses for which applied for Accreditation

+ — Status of Accreditation - Preliminary/ Applied for SAR and results awaited/ Applied for SAR
and visits completed/ Results of the visits awaited/ Rejected/ Approved for . . Courses (specify
the number of courses)

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 293 ---
+ For each Programme the following details are to be given(Preferably in Tabular form):
Name
+ Number of seats
Duration
+ Cut off marks/rank of admission during the last three years
+ Fee (as approved by the state government)
+ — Placement Facilities
+ Campus placement in last three years with minimum salary , maximum salary and average salary

+ Name and duration of Programme(s)having Twinning and Collaboration with Foreign University(s)
and being run in the same Campus along with status of their AICTE approval. If there is Foreign
Collaboration, give the following details:

Details of the Foreign University
+ Name of the University
Address
Website
Accreditation status of the University in its Home Country
Ranking of the University in the Home Country

Whether the degree offered is equivalent to an Indian Degree? If yes, the name of the agency
which has approved equivalence. If no, implications for students in terms of pursuit of higher
studies in India and abroad and job both within and outside the country

+ Nature of Collaboration
Conditions of Collaboration
Complete details of payment a student has to make to get the full benefit of Collaboration

+ For each Programme Collaborated provide the following:

Programme Focus
Number of seats
Admission Procedure
Fee (as approved by the state government)

+ — Placement Facility
Placement Records for last three years with minimum salary, maximum salary and average salary

+ Whether the Collaboration Programme is approved by AICTE? If not whether the Domestic/
Foreign University has applied to AICTE for approval

7. Faculty
+ Course/Branch wise list Faculty members:
Permanent Faculty
Adjunct Faculty
Permanent Faculty: Student Ratio

+ Number of Faculty employed and left during the last three years

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 294 ---
8. Profile of Vice Chancellor/ Director/ Principal/Faculty

For each Faculty give a page covering with Passport size photograph

Name

Date of Birth

Unique ID

Education Qualifications

Work Experience

+ Teaching

+ — Research
Industry
others

Area of Specialization

Courses taught at Diploma/ Post Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate/ Post Graduate Diploma
Level

Research guidance(Number of Students)
No. of papers published in National/ International Journals/ Conferences
Master (Completed/Ongoing)
Ph.D. (Completed/Ongoing)

Projects Carried out

Patents (Filed & Granted)

Technology Transfer

Research Publications (No.of papers published in National/International Journals/Conferences)

No. of Books published with details (Name of the book, Publisher with ISBN, year of publication,
etc.)

9. Fee

Details of Fee, as approved by State Fee Committee, for the Institution

Time schedule for payment of Fee for the entire Programme

No. of Fee waivers granted with amount and name of students

Number of scholarship offered by the Institution, duration and amount

Criteria for Fee waivers/scholarship

Estimated cost of Boarding and Lodging in Hostels

Any other fee please specify

10. Admission
+ Number of seats sanctioned with the year of approval
+ Number of Students admitted under various categories each year in the last three years

+ Number of applications received during last two years for admission under Management Quota
and number admitted

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 295 ---
11. Admission Procedure

Mention the admission test being followed, name and address of the Test Agency/State Admission
Authorities and its URL (website)

Number of seats allotted to different Test Qualified candidate separately (AIEEE/ CET (State
conducted test/ University tests/ CMAT/ GPAT)/ Association conducted test etc.)

Calendar for admission against Management/vacant seats:
Last date of request for applications
Last date of submission of applications
Dates for announcing final results
Release of admission list (main list and waiting list shall be announced on the same day)
+ Date for acceptance by the candidate (time given shall in no case be less than 15days)
Last date for closing of admission
Starting of the Academic session
+ — The waiting list shall be activated only on the expiry of date of main list

+ The policy of refund of the Fee, in case of withdrawal, shall be clearly notified

12. Criteria and Weightages for Admission

Describe each criterion with its respective weightages i.e. Admission Test, marks in qualifying
examination etc.

Mention the minimum Level of acceptance, if any

Mention the cut-off Levels of percentage and percent ilescore of the candidates in the admission
test for the last three years

Display marks scored in Test etc. and in aggregate for all candidates who were admitted

13. List of Applicants

+ List of candidate whose applications have been received along with percentile/percentages core for
each of the qualifying examination in separate categories for open seats. List of candidate who have
applied along with percentage and percentile score for Management quota seats (merit wise)

14. Results of Admission Under Management seats/Vacant seats

Composition of selection team for admission under Management Quota with the brief profile of
members (This information be made available in the public domain after the admission process is
over)

Score of the individual candidate admitted arranged in order or merit

List of candidate who have been offered admission

Waiting list of the candidate in order of merit to be operative from the last date of joining of the first
list candidate

List of the candidate who joined within the date, vacancy position in each category before operation
of waiting list

15. Information of Infrastructure and Other Resources Available
+ Number of Class Rooms and size of each
+ Number of Tutorial rooms and size of each

+ Number of Laboratories and size of each

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 296 ---
Number of Drawing Halls with capacity of each

Number of Computer Centres with capacity of each

Central Examination Facility, Number of rooms and capacity of each

Online examination facility (Number of Nodes, Internet bandwidth, etc.)

Barrier Free Built Environment for disabled and elderly persons

Occupancy Certificate

Fire and Safety Certificate

Hostel Facilities

Library
Number of Library books/ Titles/ Journals available(Programme-wise)
List of online National/ International Journals subscribed
E- Library facilities
National Digital Library(NDL) subscription details

Laboratory and Workshop
List of Major Equipment/Facilities in each Laboratory/Workshop
List of Experimental Setup in each Laboratory/Workshop

Computing Facilities

Internet Bandwidth

Number and configuration of System

Total number of system connected by LAN

Total number of system connected by WAN

Major software packages available

Special purpose facilities available (Conduct of online Meetings/Webinars/Workshops, etc.)
+ — Facilities for conduct of classes/courses in online mode (Theory & Practical)

Innovation Cell

Social Media Cell

Compliance of the National Academic Depository (NAD), applicable to PGCM/ PGDM Institutions
and University Departments

¢ List of facilities available
+ Games and Sports Facilities
+ Extra-Curricular Activities
+ Soft Skill Development Facilities
« Teaching Learning Process
+ Curricula and syllabus for each of the Programmes as approved by the University
+ Academic Calendar of the University
+ Academic Time Table with the name of the Faculty members handling the Course
+ Teaching Load of each Faculty
+ Internal Continuous Evaluation System and place

Student's assessment of Faculty, System in place

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 297 ---
« For each Post Graduate Courses give the following:
Title of the Course
Curricula and Syllabi
Laboratory facilities exclusive to the Post Graduate Course
¢ Special Purpose
. Software, all design tools in case
+ Academic Calendar and framework
16. Enrolment and placement details of students in the last 3years
17. List of Research Projects/ Consultancy Works
+ Number of Projects carried out, funding agency, Grant received
+ Publications (if any) out of research in last three years out of masters projects
+ Industry Linkage
+ MoUs with Industries (minimum3(10))
18. LoA and subsequent EoA till the current Academic Year
19. Accounted audited statement for the last three years
20. Best Practices adopted, if any

Note: Suppression and/or misrepresentation of information shall invite appropriate penal action. The
Website shall be dynamically updated with regard to Mandatory Disclosures

Important Instructions:
+ Avoid putting personal information in public domain.

+ The mandatory disclosure should be available freely to view/download to the public without any
restrictions.

+ LoA/EOA letters (since inception) should form part of the mandatory disclosure and complete
mandatory disclosure document should be converted into a single PDF file and the URL (web-link)
to be entered in the AICTE portal (under attachments tab).

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 298 ---
ANNEXURE-11

Undertaking to be submitted by the Applicant on Institute / University
Letter head for Student Induction Program, Examination reforms &
Internship Policy

|, <Name>, Director / Principal / Registrar of the Institution / University, State and declareas under:

1. That the information given by<Name(s)>in the application made to AICTE is true and complete.
2. That the Institution / University has adopted AICTE Induction Program for Faculty / Student.

3. That the Institution / University has trained some of the Faculty members in Examination reforms.

4. That the Institution / University has implemented AICTE Internship Policy for the benefit of Students.

Date: Signature with Name & Designation
(Seal - Institution / University)

| 263 | AICTE APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 299 ---
ANNEXURE-12

YVA/ISd 40d sy #

L s0 # L s0 # 4 sZo # SL s0 # c L # GL St # LZ-0707
L sO # L sO # 4 sZL0 # SL sO # 4 L # GL St # 02-6 L0Z
L s0 # L s0 # 4 sZo # SL s0 # c L # GL St # 6L-8L07
L s0 s0 L s0 s0 c sL0o sL0o SL s0 s0 St L L GL St SL 8L-ZLOZ
SL s0 s0 L s0 s0 c sZ0 sZ0 c sZ0 sZ0 St L L GL St GL LL-9L07
SL sO L sO 4 sZL0 4 sZL0 St L OL St SL-LLO@
GL sZo s0 L s0 s0 4 STL sZ0 c L sZ0 St SL L OL v St LL-OLOZ
SL SLO s0 L s0 s0 4 STL SLO 4 L 0£0 St SL L OL S € 60-9007

ueqin
-UON

o12W
/ebaw

ueqin -UON

ueqin

on2W

ueqin = /ebaw

yuawabeueyy

ueqin

-uoN = ueqin

Adewueud

o12W
/ebaw

o12W

-UON ueqin § /ebaw

syjei> pue spy paijddy

ueqin
-uoN

o12W

ueqin = /ebaw
ABojouype] bursaye>D

pue juawabeuew ja}0H

/Buiuuejlg /24n}229}714yD1y

ueqin
-UON

oeW

ueqin = /ebew

ABojouyreL
pue Buraauibug

STL | SL s0 STL | StL s0 ST ST s0 ST ST s0 S S z OL OL S S007-7007
St GL s0 St | S7L s0 S St s0 S St s0 OL S 4 St OL S €002-666L
OL v z L66L
0z 0z S66L
juawdojanap ainjnj Joy adueMoyje + punosbAe|d + sHuipying 404 ease yyulid x €

jeany

OH Uonesodi0>

asia /oneWsfeany

OH UuoneIodi0>

“"3sId /04}9\N

yuawebeuey

OH uonelodi0>
/04}9\N

jeany "3s!1d

Adewseud

OH UuOneiodi0D

jeany sid = /o2W

syeip pue spy paddy

OH uoNneJs0di0>

reany sig = /O2IW

ABojouyre] Bulsa}eD
pue juawabeuey ja10H
/Guruueyg /eanyay1YyD1y

OH uoNneJodi0>

reany 3siqd = /O2W

ABojouyralL
pue Burjeauibuq

SNOILALILSNI 13A37 33u940

si&3\ SNOIADAg 9Y} HuLinp sWAON YOOqGpueH ssaro1g jeAOAddy ay} ul payidads se yUaWasINbay pue7y

sa)
qQ
N
N
So
N
x
fe}
9
(a)
(=)
Zz
<
=x
nv
n
wi
ie)
fe)
[4
a
z
>
fe)
[4
a
a
<

—

AICTE
--- Page 300 ---
BULIDAH S141'Z66 | 10J }dadxa ‘sueak au} []e 10} SAID UI S| PUT JO} WU’ payLarag |jeys yooqpueH
$Sad0Jq JeAaouddy ani}Jadsai ‘s[1e}aP/SUOI}IPUOD JAY}O 104 ‘sIeaK SNOIAa|IC BY} 10} PUL] BY} JO JUd}X9 BU} Sa}EpI|OSUOD a[qe| aAoge aU :AaIONSLOZ Jaye panuljuodsiq

SL 0 L 0 [4 sL0 [4 sL0 St L OL St SL-LLOZ
S4SYNOD ALWNGVUD LSOd AINO ONIH344O SNOILNLILSNI
SWUJON VOD Jad sy,
UVA/ISA ad sy #
c L # - SWHON [Dd Jed sy SL 0 # i4 L # v SL # €7Z-LZO7
4 L # - (4 sZ0 # SL s0 # (4 L # v SL # LZ-0707
(4 L # - (4 sZ0 # SL sO # 4 L # v GL # 61-8107
St L L i4 SLO SLO SL s0 s0 St L L v SL SL 8L-ZLO7
St L L - 4 sZo sZo 4 sZo sZo St L OL v GL GL LL-9L07
St - i4 SLO i4 SLO St S SL SL-LLOZ
S ST SL - S ST SL S ST SL S ST GL S St GL 01-2002
SL SL 0 St St 0 St St 0 St St 0 S i4 OL OL S 90-7007
€ SL s0 S ST s0 - - - ST SL s0 SL s0 0z OL S €007-6661
8 v i4 2661
quawidojanap ainyny 40 adueMoy}je + punosBAe|d + sHulpjing 10J eave Yyuld x € 0661-S86L

SNOILNLILSNI 13A31 WWOT1dIG
--- Page 301 ---
ANNEXURE-13

Documents to be submitted to Scrutiny Committee/ Expert Visit
Committee Setting up of New Institutes & (Change of Site, Diploma
to Degree, Women to Co-ed, Merger of Institutes, New Programme) in
Existing Institutes

13.1 Scrutiny Committee

13.1.1 Original Documents for Verification by Academic Expert

SI. No. Documents Compliance document to be submitted in
case of Deficiencies

1 Proof of availability of Nomenclature of Course(s) {Documents showing the Approved
applied by the Applicant in the affiliating Nomenclature of the University/ Board for the
University/ Board Courses Applied

2 | Audited statement of accounts of Applicant Audited statement of accounts of Applicant
organization for last three years (Not applicable for | organization for last three years
new Trust/Society/ Company)

3 Proof of working capital (funds) (Refer Approval Funds (as specified in the Approval Process
Process Handbook) Handbook) in Fixed Deposits or Liquid

fundsavailable in the Bank in the Name of the
Trust

4 |Certificate issued by Bank Manager regarding Certificate issued by Bank Manager regarding
financial status of the Applicant (Refer Approval financial status of the said Trust/ Society/
ProcessHandbook) Company

5 Hard Copy of the Application as uploaded in Application Part | and Part II (if applicable)
AICTEWeb-Portal. downloaded from AICTE Web Portal

6 _|Receipt from an authorized signatory with seal Receipt from an authorized signatory as proof
from the State Government as proof of submission | ofsubmission of the application with seal from
of the application. the State Government

7 |Receipt from an authorized signatory and seal of | Receipt from an authorized signatory and seal
the affiliating body as proof of submission of the of the affiliating body as proof of submission
application. of theApplication
(Not Applicable for standalone PGDM Institutions)

8 | Detailed Project Report (DPR) Detailed Project Report

9 Details of Board of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Document mentioning the formation of Board
Management (BoM)as specified in the Approval of Governors (BoG)/ Board of Management
Process Handbook standalone PGDM Institutions) | (BoM)along with the name of the Members

NOTE: Since the Council has introduced and encouraged ONLINE Scrutiny/Re-Scrutiny/EVC; it is desired that
the Institution should be prepared with legible/readable scanned copies of the required documents. In the
event of ONLINE interaction of the Institute with the committee connectivity issues should be addressed
well in advance. Any failure in this regards on the day of the committee shall be the sole responsibility of the
Institution. No future representation in this regard shall be entertained.

AICTE

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 302 ---
13.1.2 Original Documents for Verification by Advocate

Documents

Affidavit (Refer Approval Process Handbook)

Compliance document to be submitted in case

of Deficiencies

Affidavit (Refer Approval Process Handbook)

2 |A Registration document of the Society/Trust/ Trust/ Society/ Company Deed along with
Company under Section 8/ PPP/ BOT indicating Amendments if any mentioning all the Bye-Laws
its members, objectives and Memorandum of approved/registered by the Competent Authority
Associations and Rules, duly attested/ certified by
the concerned Authority

3 |Resolution by the Applicant organization for Resolution by the Applicant as applicable as
starting the new Technical Institution and specified in the Approval Process Handbook
allocation of Land/ Building/Funds for the
proposed activities as specified in the Approval
Process Handbook

4 |Certificate regarding Minority Status, if applicable |Concerned State Government GO indicating
at the time of application Minority status of the Applicant

5 |Certificate issued by an Advocate in a format as Certificate issued by an Advocate as specified in
prescribed the Approval Process Handbook

6 | Classification of Land (Mega/ Metro/ Urban/Rural) | Classification of Land (Mega/ Metro/ Urban/Rural)
Certificate by the Competent Authority Certificate by the Competent Authority

7 |Documents showing possession of the Land in the |Khasara - Khatauni/ Patta/ Chitta/143 and
Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company Registered Document for the said Land in the

Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company
8 |Land Conversion Certificate Land Conversion Certificate issued by the
Competent Authority of the concerned State
Government
9 |Land Use Certificate Land Use Certificate issued by the Competent
Authority of the concerned State Government
10 |Khasra Plan (Master Plan) Demarcating the entire | Khasra Plan (Master Plan) Demarcating the entire

Land area to show that the Land is contiguous,
issued by the Competent Authority

Land area issued by the Competent Authority

13.1.3 Original Documents for Verification by Architect

SI. Documents Compliance document to be
No. submitted in case of Deficiencies
1 |Site Plan of the proposed Technical Institution prepared by | Site Plan of the proposed Technical
an Architect registered with Council of Architecture (CoA)/ | Institution approved by the Competent
Licensed Surveyor and duly approved by the Competent —_| Plan Sanctioning Authority of the
Plan Sanctioning Authority of the concerned State concerned State Government/ UT
Government/ UT
2 |Complete Building Plan of the proposed Technical Complete Building Plan of the proposed
Institution prepared by an Architect registered with Technical Institution approved by the
Council of Architecture (CoA)/ Licensed Surveyor and duly |Competent Plan Sanctioning Authority
approved by the Competent Plan Sanctioning Authority of the concerned State Government/ UT
of the concerned State Government/ UT (Plans shall be
verified for the entire duration of the Course).
3 |Floor Plans, sections and elevations of all proposed/ Floor Plans, sections and elevations of all

existing Buildings exclusively intended for use of the
proposed Campus at the permanent site with a table
clearly mentioning all rooms, with carpet area of each
in m2, as specified in Instructional, Administrative
and Amenities requirements certified by the Architect
registered with the CoA. (Plans shall be verified for the

entire duration of the Course)

proposed/ existing Building sexclusively
intended for use of the proposed
Campus approved by the Competent
Plan Sanctioning Authority of the
concerned State Government/UT

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 303 ---
Phase-wise Plan of construction to achieve total carpet
and built up area as required for the conduct of all applied
Courses from the first to final year. This shall be certified by
an Architect registered with the CoA

Phase-wise Plan of construction to
achieve total carpet and built up area as
required for theconduct of all applied
Courses from the first to final year.
This shall be certified by an Architect
registered with the CoA

Certificate issued by an Architect regarding approved
Building Plans. (Refer Approval Process Handbook)

Certificate issued by an Architect as
specified in the Approval Process
Handbook

FSI/ FAR Certificate obtained from the Competent Authority
as designated by the concerned Municipal Corporation or
the local authority that approves Building Plans, or the State
Government/UT

FSI/ FAR Certificate obtained from the
Competent Authority

FSI/ FAR applicable as on date

FSI/ FAR Certificate obtained from the
Competent Authority

Total construction permissible as per FSI/FAR

To be calculated by the Expert

Total Built-Up area approved as per approved Plan in m2

To be calculated by the Expert from the
Building Plan

Total built up area required as per applied intake in m2
(to be updated by the application submitted by the Trust/
Society/ Company)

To be calculated by the Expert

Whether any River, Canals, Rail Tracks, Highways or any
other such entity hampering continuity of Land is passing
through the Land. (Y/N). If Yes, mention the details/ Whether
High Tension Transmission line is passing through the Land
(Y/N). If Yes, mention the details

Khasra Plan/ Site Plan

Occupancy Certificate from the Competent Authority clearly
stating that the Building(s) is/are fully developed and ready
in all aspects for the intended use considering the total
Built-Up area as required to run the Programme and the
Divisions/Departments for the First Year of the Course

Occupancy Certificate From the
Competent Authority

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 304 ---
13.2 Expert Visit Committee

Documents

Documents related to Land (possession of Land,
Land use Certificate, Land conversion Certificate,
Khasra Plan etc.)

Compliance document to be submitted in case

of Deficiencies

Concerned Documents/ Certificate issued by the
Competent Authority of the concerned State
Government and duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

Whether any River, Canals, Rail Tracks, Highways or
any other such entity hampering continuity of Land
is passing through the Land.(Y/N).If Yes, mention
the details

Khasra Plan/ Site Plan Certificate issued by the
Competent Authority of the concerned State
Government duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

Whether High Tension Transmission line is passing
through the Land (Y/N). If Yes, mention the details

Khasra Plan/ Site Plan Certificate issued by the
Competent Authority of the concerned State
Government duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

Details of all other educational Institutions run by
the same Trust/ Society/ Company or management
or by any other management to which the Chairman
of the Applicant Trust/ Society/ Company is a
member. (In case of existing Institutions in the same
location simultaneous verification of the document
and inspection for both existing and new Technical
Institution shall be done)

Affidavit to the effect shall be given

Copy of the advertisement in at least one National
Daily, for recruitment of Principal/ Director and
Faculty members

Copy of the advertisement in at least one National
Daily, for recruitment of Principal/ Director and
Faculty members

Stock registers of Laboratory/ Workshop equipment
(First Year Laboratories)/ Stock registers of
Computers, System software, Application software,
Printers/ Stock registers of office equipment

Copy of the stock register(s) with entry regarding
Laboratory equipment/ Computers/ Software/
Office equipment

Barrier free built environment and toilets created for
physically challenged. (Ramp or Working Lift etc.)

Compliance has to be verified physically only,
however the Applicant can submit photographs
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company. Also an Affidavit to the
effect be submitted

Language Laboratory

Compliance has to be verified physically only,
however the Applicant can submit photographs
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company and shall also produce
the bills for purchasing equipment for Language
Laboratory. Copy of the Stock register after
making necessary entry to be produced duly
attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/
Society/ Company

Principal/Director’s Office/ Board room/ Office all-
inclusive/ Departmental Office/ Cabin for HoDs/
Faculty Room/ Central Store/ Examination Control
Office/ Class Rooms/ Tutorial Room/ Drawing Hall/
Seminar Hall/ Library and Reading Room/ Computer
Center/ Boys Common Room/ Girls Common Room/
Stationery Store/ First aid cum Sick Room/ Toilets/
Training and Placement Office/ Maintenance/
Housekeeping/ Pantry/Common Roon/ Cafeteria

Compliance has to be verified physically only.
(However the Applicant can submit photographs
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company and also submit an
Architect's Certificate to that effect)

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 305 ---
Laboratories/ Workshops

Compliance has to be verified physically only.
(However the Applicant can submit photographs
duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company and also submit an
Architect's Certificate to that effect in case of
completion of infrastructure and a Certificate from
the Principal for the possession of the equipment)
Tools and Equipment shall be available as per the
norms of the affiliating body, proof of purchasing
the same (Bills and proof of payment) and stock
register(s) entry has to be submitted

Internet Bandwidth

Certificate of the service provider and proof of
payment. Bill paid for the last month shall also be
submitted

12 |Printers/ A1 size Colour Printers/ Legal Application | The Applicant can submit the bills for purchasing
Software/ Legal System Software/ Library|Printers/ Software/ Computer/ Backup power
Management Software/ PCs to Student ratio/ Multi}supply and the same shall be certified by the
Media PC/ Provision of backup power supply Applicant. Copy of the Stock registers after

making necessary entry to be produced

13 |Volumes/ Books/ Titles/ National Journals The Applicant can submit the bills for purchasing

Books/ Titles/ National Journals, duly certified by
the Applicant. Copy of the Accession register after
making necessary entry to be produced

14 | Safety provisions, including fire and other calamities |The Applicant can submit photographs duly

attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/
Society/ Company and shall also produce the bills
for purchasing fire safety equipment

15 |General Insurance provided for assets against fire, | Copy of General Insurance with the Policy number
burglary and other calamities

16 |Details and proof about medical facility and|MoU with a nearby Hospital or Clinic or
counselling arrangements Appointment of a Doctor and a Nurse in the

Campus and proof for Compliance of first aids

17 |Sanction of electrical load by electric supply|Sanction order from Electricity Office and proof
provider company for paying the amount towards the bill

18 | Availability of Potable water supply The Applicant can submit photographs duly

attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/
Society/ Company and shall also produce the
bills for purchasing potable water supplying
equipment

19 |A Certificate by an Architect giving details of sewage |Compliance has to be verified physically only,
disposal system however, a Certificate by an Architect giving

details of sewage disposal system

20 |Vehicle Parking/ Display board within the premises|Compliance has to be verified physically only,
as well as in the web site of the Institution indicating | however the Applicant can submit photographs
the feedback facility of students and Faculty|duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
available in AICTE Web-Portal Trust/ Society/ Company

21 |All weather motorable approach roads/ General}|Compliance has to be verified physically only,
and Departmental notice boards however the Applicant can submit photographs

duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company

22 | Institution website Print out of the first page and other relevant pages

of the Institution website

23 |Details and proof of telephone connections | Proof for paying the amount towards bill
available at the proposed Technical Institution

24 |Stock register Copy of the Stock registers duly attested by

the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/
Company after making all necessary entry to be
produced

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 306 ---
13.3 Expert Visit Committee for Break in EoA/Restoration/OCI/FN/ Before First Batch Pass out for
Existing Institutions (Documents needed in addition to the ones mentioned in Clause13.2 for Expert
Visit Committee)

Deficiencies as per EVC

Compliance document to be submitted

Whether any other Institution (AICTE approved/not
under AICTEambit)are being run/proposed to be
run in he same patch of Lands hown for the present
Institution. Also, no other Programmes such as BBA/
BCA/B.Sc. (S/W Engineering)/ M.Sc. (S/W Engineering)
etc. are being run/ sharing in the premises (Land and
Building)of the present Institution

An Affidavit to the effect shall be obtained

Occupancy Certificate/Completion Certificate/ Form
D/ Structural Stability Certificate

Concerned Certificate issued by the Competent
Authority

Complete Institution Building Plan of proposed
Technical

Copy of Complete Building Plan of the Technical
Institution approved by the Competent Plan
Sanctioning Authority of the concerned State
Government/ UT

Whether Laboratories and Workshops possess
relevant equipment as per the University syllabus/
Whether equipment procured are at the operational
stage

Compliance has to be verified physically
only. (However the Applicant can submit
photographs duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company and
also submit an Architect’s Certificate to that
effect in case of completion of infrastructure and
Certificate from the Principal for the possession
of the equipment) Tools and Equipment shall
be available as per the norms of the affiliating
body, proof of purchasing the same (Bills and
proof of payment) and stock register(s) entry
has to be submitted

Appointment of Student Counsellor/ Establishment
of Anti Ragging Committee/ Establishment of
Committee for SC/ ST/ Establishment of Internal
Complaint Committee (ICC) Committee as per section
4 of Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
(Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013/
Institution Industry Cell/ Innovation Cell

Documents/Minutes of Board of Governors
(BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) for the
constitution of Student Counsellor/ Committee/
Cell duly attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of
the Trust/ Society/ Company

Establishment of Grievance Redressal Committee in
the Institution and the Appointment of OMBUDSMAN
by the University

Documents/Minutes of Board of Governors
(BoG)/ Board of Management (BoM) for the
constitution of the committee along with the
list of nominated members duly attested by
the Chairman/ Secretary of the Trust/ Society/
Company. In case of OMBUDSMAN, an order
from the concerned University for appointment

Establishment of online Grievance Redressal

Mechanism

Print out from the Institution website for the
establishment of the Grievance Redressal
Mechanism duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

Number of Faculty

TDS Certificate for the previous year/ copy
of selection minutes for the appointment of
Faculty/ acquaintance register/ Audited Bank
Statement for the payment of salaries for the
past 6 months through Nationalized banks

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 307 ---
Whether the salary for all the Faculty members are
paid as per sixth pay commission recommendations/
Whether the payment of salaries is through RTGS/
NEFT/ Online

Digital Payment for payment of salaries

Whether hostel facilities are available for

accommodating students of FN/OCI category

Compliance has to be verified physically
only. (However the Applicant can submit
photographs duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company and
also submit an Architect’s Certificate to that
effect)

Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act,
2006 in the Institution

Certificate from Food Corporation of India

Digital Payment for all Financial Transactions as per
MOE Directives

Proof for payment of salaries and other
transactions for procurement of equipment
through banks

Copies of AICTE approvals (LoA and EoA of
subsequentyears) obtained since inception of the
Institution till date shall be placed on the web site of
the Institution

Copies of AICTE approvals for all the years to be
submitted

CCTV Installation at prominent locations

The Applicant can submit photographs duly
attested by the Chairman/ Secretary of the
Trust/ Society/ Company and shall also produce
the bills for purchasing CCTV

Provision to watch MOOCs Courses through SWAYAM
& SWAYAM PRABHA

Documents obtained from theUniversity

National Academic depository (NAD) as per MOE
directives (Applicable only for Standalone PGDM and
Universitydepartments)

Documents showing the registration with NAD

General insurance provided for assets against fire,
burglary and other calamities/ Group Accident Policy/
Students safety Insurance

Copy of the Insurance from the Insurance
Agency duly attested by the Chairman/
Secretary of the Trust/ Society/ Company

Availability of vouchers and payment receipts
indicating proof of purchase

Digital Payment for all Financial Transactions to
be submitted

AICTE

y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23

| 272 |
--- Page 308 ---
ANNEXURE-14

MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV)

About the Course

MBA/PGDM in Innovation, Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV) is a two years PG level
management programme can be offered by higher educational institutions. This is an action oriented and
outcome basedprogrammewilladmitstudents with innovative ideas and problem solving mind set with
access to pre-incubation and incubation support at the institute to convert ideas to business model, traverse
a path of entrepreneurship and practice venture as part of academic curriculum to obtain the master degree.

Conditions, Requirements and Eligibility

The existing and new institutions shall apply for PG level management course MBA/PGDM in Innovation,
Entrepreneurship and Venture Development (IEV), provided they satisfy following conditions along with the
eligibility requirements as mentioned in Clause 2.15.

a.

Procedure

Institutewith a functional incubation unit and pre-incubation facilities, co-working space,
innovation lab facilities. The incubation unit should be established as Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) preferable a registered entity and minimum three years of operation.

Existence and empanelment of competent, trained personals (in-house and external) at the
incubation unit and institute with teaching and learning resources to train, mentor the student
innovators/entrepreneurs.

Existence of funding schemes at the incubation unit and institute to support student innovators
and entrepreneurs for the idea development, prototype development, business model and startup
development.

Institute/incubation unit's competency and capability to manage and support a batch of 30
student innovators and potential entrepreneurs per year starting from idea generation to venture
Development and startup growth stage.

In additions to the procedures mentioned in the Clause 2.15, additional submission and scrutiny process for
approving the MBA/PGDM in IEV course are as follows.

a.

The Institution shall apply on AICTE Web-Portal along with the additional documents as per
Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook.

Scrutiny Committee constituted at the regional office level of AICTE shall verify the additional
documents as per Appendix 17 of the Approval Process Handbook submitted for MBA/PGDM in
IEV course.

A special scrutiny committee constituted at the AICTE HQ level shall verify Appendix 17 and if
required, AICTE will invite institutions to present their case in front of the committee to demonstrate
their competency and capability to run the MBA/PGDM in IEV course.

APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 309 ---
ANNEXURE-15

Ready Reckoner for Frequent Queries
1. No need to submit the hard copy of the application to the Regional Office (except New Institute).

2. University Departments shall apply under the same PID of the University

3. In case of applications under Chapter Il, NOC from the State Government/ UT is required as per
Appendix 17.
4. If the Applicant/ Institution is invited to appear before the Scrutiny/ Re-Scrutiny to verify the documents/

to present their case before the Standing Hearing Committee/ Standing Appellate Committee for
compliance of the deficiencies, the representative(s) shall also bring the documents presented to the
Scrutiny/ Expert Visit Committee to make use of the opportunity given effectively.

5. If an Institution intends to utilise a Building constructed earlier, the Building approvals obtained from
the then authorities shall be produced, else the approval for the same shall be obtained from the current
approving authorities.

6. To include new nomenclatures in the Diploma/ Under Graduate/ Post Graduate Degree Courses,
approval from the University/ Board, as applicable along with the Curriculum and Syllabus shall be sent
to the Policy and Academic Planning Bureau, AICTE.

7. Student admission (Except PMSSS) is the subject of State Authorities.

8. AICTE does NOT insist on separate boundary walls for Institutions existing in the same Campus by
the same Trust/ Society/ Company, provided the Land and Built-up norms shall be fulfilled for the
Programmes/ Courses approved.

9 An Institution requesting for any modification in the Extension of Approval and if the same is approved
by the Council, a corrigendum shall be issued.

10. EVC shall check the facilities only for “Approved Intake”, not based on admitted students.

11. Certificate verification for PGDM Programme, for employment/ higher Education shall be obtained from
the concerned Institution.

12. Excess payment shall be refunded, not adjusted in future transactions.

13. TER charges are accepted only by digital payment through the Portal, Demand Draft is not accepted
under any circumstance.

14. | Once the application is processed as per the stipulated procedure, TER charges are not refundable (other
than those mentioned in the Approval Process Handbook), if the application is rejected.

15.  Forthe release of Security Deposits through FDR/RTGS, only online applications are accepted. The status
of processing shall be viewed through the portal.

16. Tosubmit any documents to the AICTE HQ/ Regional Office, use e-mail ids as provided in Appendix 14.

17. Any Queries/Clarifications related to policy shall be sent ONLY to helpdeskab@aicte-india.org and All
technical queries (portal related) shall be sent ONLY to helpdesk] @aicte-india.org

18. — Allinformation related to Approval Process will be available in AICTE website; www.aicte-india.org

AICTE ‘¥y APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23 | 274 |
--- Page 310 ---
Process Involved in Various Applications are as follows:

SI.No. Chapter Applied for Process

1 ll Extension of Approval based on Self-Disclosure

EC
Il Introduction/ Continuation of seats for Non Resident Indian(s)

| Setting up a New Technical Institution

ll Change of Site/ Location

Conversion of Diploma Level into Degree Level

ll To start New Programme Level in the existing Institutions Scrutiny

Il Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating rowed by

in the same Campus / City

NO] UW} RR] Ww] n

©
<

Introduction of Open and Distance Learning/Online Courses

9 ll Simultaneous Closure of One Programme and Opening of another
Programme

10 ll Extension of Approval of the existing Institutions after a break in the
preceding Academic Year/ Restoration of Intake

11 ll Introduction of supernumerary seats for Foreign Nationals/ Overseas
Citizen of India (OCI)/Children of Indian Workers in Gulf Countries

12 Vv Increase in Approved Intake in Programme/ Courses in Open and Distance
Learning mode

EVC

ll Conversion of Degree Level into Diploma Level

14 Il Merger of Institutions under the same Trust/ Society/ Company operating
in the same Campus within 1km Aerial Distance (applied without any Land
relaxation)

ll Conversion of Women's Institution into Co-Ed Institution and vice-versa

Il Increase in Intake/ Additional Course(s) including Institutions having total
“Approved Intake” less than the “Maximum Intake Allowed” and Indian
Language Courses

ll Introduction of Integrated/Dual Degree Course

ll Closure of the Institution

ll Introduction of Fellow Programme in Management

Scrutiny
20 Il Change in the Name of the Course(s)/ Merger of the Courses/ Reduction in
Intake/ Closure of Programme(s)/ Course(s)

21 ll Change in the Name of the Institution or affiliating University/ Board or
Type of Institution (Institution(s) converted into a University)

22 Il Change in the Minority Status of the Institution
23 ll Change in the Name of the Bank

24 Il Change in the Name of the Trust/ Society/ Company
25 Il Extended EoA

26 ll Closure of Courses in Open and Distance Learning mode

27 ll Collaboration and Twinning Programme

AICTE ‘¥¥ APPROVAL PROCESS HANDBOOK 2022-23
--- Page 311 ---
Regional Offices of AICTE

Regional Offices Telephone Jurisdiction

Central Airport By pass Road, Gandhinagar, Bhopal, 0755 2744313 | Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh
Madhya Pradesh 462033 0265 2750648
E-mail: cro@aicte-india.org
Eastern Govt. College of Engineering and Leather 033 23357459 | Andaman and Nicobar, Sikkim, Orissa,
Technology Campus, LB Block, Sector Ill, Salt 23357312 | Jharkhand, Assam, Manipur, Nagaland,
Lake City, Kolkata 700 106 23353089 Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya, Arunachal
E-mail: ero@aicte-india.org DAERGUE Pradesh, West Bengal
23356690
23359546
Northern Adjoining Directorate of Technical Education, 0512 2585014 ‘| Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar
Vikas Nagar, Zoo Road, Kanpur-208002 2585018
E-mail: nro@aicte-india.org 2581263
2585012
North-West NWRO, Plot No.1, 5th Floor,DTE, Punjab 0172 2613326 | Chandigarh, Haryana, Jammu &
Building, Sector 36 A, Chandigarh-160 036 2661201 | Kashmir,Ladakh, Delhi, Punjab, Rajasthan,
E-mail: nwro@aicte-india.org 2660179 _ | Himachal Pradesh
Southern Shastri Bhawan, 26, Haddows Road, 044 28275650 | Tamil Nadu, Puducherry
Nungambakkam, Chennai 600 006 28279998
E-mail: sro@aicte-india.org 28232754
28255863
South Central West Block Nos. 201-204 & 221 to 224, 2nd 040 23340113 | Andhra Pradesh, Telangana
Floor, Swarna Jayanti Commercial Complex, 23341036
Ameerpet, Hyderabad 500038 Telangana 23345071
E-mail: scro@aicte-india.org
South-West PK. Block, Palace Road, Bangalore 560 009 080 22253232 | Karnataka
E-mail: swro@aicte-india.org 22205919
29574357
Western AICTE-Western Regional Office, Industrial 022 28475793 | Goa, Maharashtra, Daman and Diu, Dadra
Centre, NITIE Campus, Vihar Lake, 28470019 | and Nagar Haveli
Mumbai-400087
E-mail: wro@aicte-india.org
Guwahati Camp Eastern Region Camp Office,Assam Engineering | 0361 2570104 | Assam, Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram,
Office College Campus, Jalukbari, Guwahati - 781013, Tripura, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh

Assam E-mail: coguwahati@aicte-india.org

Thiruvananthapuram | AICTE South Western Region Camp Office, CET | 0471 2592323 | Kerala and Lakshadweep

Camp Office Campus, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala 695 016 2594343

E-mail: aicte.tvpm@aicte-india.org 2596363
Vadodara Camp Camp Office Vadodara 0265 2750648 | Gujarat
Office Central Regional Camp Office, A-1,2 Quarters, 2750614

Chameli Baug, Campus of M.S. University of
Baroda, Vadodara- 390002

E-mail: covadodara@aicte-india.org

Any Queries/Clarifications related to policy shall be sent ONLY to helpdeskab@aicte-india.org and All technical queries (portal related)
shall be sent ONLY to helpdesk1 @aicte-india.org
--- Page 312 ---
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION
Nelson Mandela Marg, New Delthi-110070

CF) @officialaicte @) @AIcTE India (>) /MediaAIcTE (nm) /company/aicteindia
arg www.aicte-india.org