--- Page 1 ---
Wanita qa
weet afar
Prof. Rajive Kumar
Member Secretary

AICTE/MS Office/Special 02

afea anda cotter fen oRag
(ara Ura a va uifatte fer)
Aer Asen arf, aa Ga, ag feet - 110070
3 geara: 011-26131497
bi ¥ 4a : ms@aicte-india.
ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNI EDUCATION
(A Statutory Body of the Govt. of India)
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India
Nelson Mandela Marg, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi-110067
Phone: 011-26131497
E-mail: ms@aicte-india.org

1 May 2020

Subject: Guidelines to Universities, Deemed to be Universities, Affiliated Technical Institutions and

Polytechnics

Dear Sir/Madam,

UGC constituted a committee to frame guidelines on examination and academic calendar in view

of COVID-19 Pandemic. The committee submitted the report, which has been accepted and
notified by UGC vide vide D.O.No.F.1-1/2020(Secy) dated 29" April 2020. The guidelines are

attached with this letter.

All the Universities,

Deemed to be Universities, Affiliated Technical Institutions and

Polytechnics are requested to follow these guidelines.

With kind regards,

Ww 4 2.02 Be

SS
(Prof. Rajive Kumar)

Member Secretary

Vice Chancellors of Technical Universities
Vice Chancellors Deemed to be Universities
Secretary, State Technical Education
Director, State Technical Education

Director/Principal, Affiliated Technical Institutions
--- Page 2 ---
UGC Guidelines on Examinations and Academic
Calendar for the Universities in View of COVID-19
Pandemic and Subsequent Lockdown

ee
am-ftsr faye

University Grants Commission
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
New Delhi

April, 2020
--- Page 3 ---
Table of Contents

S.No. Particulars Page No.

1. Introduction 2

2. Issues deliberated by the Committee 3-4

3. Guidelines 5-10
Examinations 5-7
Academic Calendar 8-9

4. Some General Guidelines 9-10

5. Acknowledgement 11
--- Page 4 ---
UGC Guidelines on Examinations and Academic Calendar for
the Universities in View of COVID-19 Pandemic
and Subsequent Lockdown

Introduction:

The whole world, including India, is passing through unprecedented difficult times due to
the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic. As all universities and colleges are closed due to
national lockdown, the teaching — learning process and research activities have been
badly disrupted. The schedule of Terminal Semester examinations has also got disturbed.
In such scenario, it is joint responsibility of all the stakeholders to manage multiple key
issues relating to academic activities in the institutions. While it is crucial to follow
measures taken by the Government to contain the spread of COVID-19, it is also
important to continue the educational process making effective use of technology and
other available options. Future may have many uncertainties but difficult times demand
quick appropriate decisions. We must be optimistic that we can reinvent work again and
engage the students in effective and constructive ways. The University Grants
Commission (UGC) has been engaged with this issue and contemplating measures to
face the challenge of safeguarding the interests of the academic fraternity in general and
students in particular. Confronted with vital issues of examinations and academic
calendar, UGC constituted an Expert Committee to deliberate on these issues and make
recommendations to address them. The composition of the Committee is given as
Annexure.

In the present circumstances, the major concerns are as follows:

1. Ensuring the health, safety and security of the students, faculty and staff and also
to continue academic activities.

2. Conducting the examinations and declaration of results.

Facilitating the students to participate in further admissions, placement processes,
research and training etc.

4. Charting out a plan for the next academic session.
--- Page 5 ---
In the current scenario, the following issues have been deliberated by the Expert
Committee:

1. Modes of Teaching-learning Process

The universities are adopting offline mode, i.e. conducting classes in face to face
interaction, with a few exceptions and that too, for very few courses. Some of the
universities lack adequate IT infrastructure for effective delivery of education through e-
learning mode. In order to tackle the pandemic COVID-19 in the educational institutions
and to ensure continuity in teaching- learning process, MHRD and UGC have issued
certain guidelines and advisories from time to time and have taken concrete steps to
impart online education by making the best use of e-resources which are available on
www.ugc.ac.in.The MHRD and the UGC have been emphasizing to continue with the
teaching-learning process using online modes such as Google Classroom, Google
Hangout, Cisco Webex Meeting, You Tube Streaming, OERs, SWAYAM Platform and
SWAYAMPRABHA (available on Doordarshan (Free dish) and Dish TV), etc. The faculty
members have contributed a lot for the benefit of students during the lockdown period by
using a number of tools like WhatsApp groups, other social media tools and emails. But
the students also expect that the faculty must maintain a “substantive contact” with them.
So, even after posting the lecture material online, teachers need to maintain
communication with the students and discuss course material with them on a regular
basis.

2. Academic Calendar for the Session 2019-20

The universities have completed the examinations of the odd semester during December-
2019/ January-2020 and the results have been declared. Most of the institutions had
already covered 60% to 70% of teaching-learning process for ongoing Even Semester
before the dispersal of classes in March, 2020. Further, the remaining part of the
curriculum has been attended/ being attended through online mode as the norms of
“social distancing” are to be followed by all educational institutions in the interest of the
students, faculty and the staff. In fact, the norms of social distance will be required to be
maintained by the educational institutions for quite some time, even if the normalcy
returns by the first week of May, 2020. Therefore, for the sake of safety of the students,
faculty and staff, all universities are required to reschedule the academic calendar 2019-
2020.
--- Page 6 ---
3. Modes of Examinations

Like the modes of teaching-learning, most of the universities follow the physical mode of
examinations, with a few exceptions. On this aspect also, some of the universities lack
adequate IT infrastructure for conducting online examinations. The hiring of private
agencies for conducting online examinations also does not seem feasible in view of the
fact that examinations are to be conducted simultaneously by all the universities.
Therefore, keeping in view the basic infrastructure available at the level of the institutions
and accessibility of internet to the students, especially in remote areas, it is not feasible
to uniformly adopt the online mode of examination at this juncture.

4. Academic Calendar for the Session 2020-21

Several School Boards are yet to complete their Class XIl Examinations, as of now.
Examinations for the Even Semester in the universities are also getting delayed due to
national lockdown. Naturally, all these things will delay the admission process in the
university system for the next academic session. In order to tackle this situation, the
universities may require some amendments in their academic calendar for the academic
session 2020-21.

5. Functioning of Laboratories

Like teaching, research has also suffered during the lockdown period as the laboratories
are closed. It would be appropriate that during the period of lockdown, laboratories are
maintained by the research staff/ teachers of the concerned department(s) on rotation
basis, without violating the norms of “social distancing”. However, the universities may
take appropriate decision to allow Pls/ Ph.D. scholars and Post-Doctoral Fellows to
maintain labs/ conduct research, with strict compliance of the guidelines/ directives issued
by the appropriate authorities/ Governments from time to time.
--- Page 7 ---
GUIDELINES

Based on the recommendations of the Expert Committee, the following Guidelines have
been framed for the Examinations and the Academic Calendar in the Universities. The
guidelines are advisory in nature and each university may chart out its own plan of action
taking into consideration the issues pertaining to COVID — 19 Pandemic.

EXAMINATIONS

1.

Maintaining the sanctity of academic expectations and integrity of examination
process, the universities may adopt alternative and simplified modes and methods
of examinations to complete the process in shorter period of time in compliance
with CBCS requirements as prescribed by UGC from time to time. These may
include MCQ/ OMR based examinations, Open Book Examination, Open Choices,
assignment/ presentation-based assessments etc.

The universities may adopt efficient and innovative modes of examinations by
reducing the time from 3 hours to 2 hours assigned to each examination, if need
arises but without compromising the quality, so that the process may be completed
in multiple shifts and, at the same time, sanctity to evaluate the performance of a
student is also maintained.

The universities may conduct Terminal / Intermediate Semester / Year
examinations in offline / online mode, as per their Ordinances/ Rules and
Regulations, Scheme of Examinations, observing the guidelines of “social
distancing” and keeping in view the support system available with them and
ensuring fair opportunity to all students.

Terminal semester / year examinations for PG/ UG courses/ programmes may be
conducted by universities as suggested in the academic calendar keeping in mind
the protocols of “social distancing”.

For intermediate semester/year students, the universities may conduct
examinations, after making a comprehensive assessment of their level of
preparedness, residential status of the students, status of COVID-19 pandemic
spread in different regions / state and other factors.

In case the situation does not appear to be normal in view of COVID-19, in order
to maintain “social distancing”, safety and health of the students, grading of the
students could be composite of 50% marks on the basis of the pattern of internal

5
--- Page 8 ---
evaluation adopted by the universities and the remaining 50% marks can be
awarded on the basis of performance in previous semester only (if available). The
internal evaluation can be continuous evaluation, prelims, mid-semester, internal
evaluation or whatever name is given for student progression.

In the situations where previous semester or previous year marks are not available,
particularly in the first year of annual pattern of examinations, 100% evaluation
may be done on the basis of internal assessments.

If the student wishes to improve the grades, he/she may appear in special exams
for such subjects during next semester.

This provision for intermediate semester examinations is only for the current
academic session (2019-20) in view of COVID-19 pandemic, while maintaining
safety and health of all the stakeholders and sanctity and quality of examinations.

6. In addition to the above, following steps are required to be taken:

i. The scheme of “Carry forward” (for the subjects in which the student has
failed) will be allowed for the current academic year in the universities
and every student will be promoted to next semester/year. However,
such students may clear the examination for the course in which he/ she
has failed/ remained absent, whenever the examination is held next.

ii. |The students may be allowed to improve their grades by offering one
additional opportunity to appear for the current semester course(s) in
succeeding semesters/ years or through supplementary examinations.

7. The modalities for examination and other related activities be applied uniformly
across all courses in a university.

8. The students should be informed well in advance (at least one week) about the
conduct of examinations and other related activities.

9. Regarding the requirement of minimum percentage of attendance for the students/
research scholars, the period of lockdown may be treated as ‘deemed to be
attended’ by all the students/ research scholars.

10. The universities may adopt appropriate strategies to facilitate the UG/ PG students
pursuing Projects/ Dissertations, in view of the prevailing circumstances. The
universities may consider to assign review-based/ secondary data-based projects
--- Page 9 ---
or software-driven projects, instead of laboratory-based experiments or field/
survey-based assignments to these students.

11.The universities may conduct the practical examinations and Viva-Voce
Examinations through Skype or other meeting apps, and in case of intermediate
semesters, the practical examinations may be conducted during the ensuing
semesters.

12.The universities may conduct the Ph.D. and M. Phil. Viva -Voce Examinations
through Video Conferencing using Google, Skype, Microsoft Technologies or any
other reliable and mutually convenient technology, subject to the approval of the
concerned statutory authority of the university, in compliance of Clause 9.6 to 9.9
of the UGC Regulations, 2016 regarding award of M. Phil / Ph.D. Degree. While
conducting the Viva-Voce Examination through Video Conferencing using
electronic means, it may be ensured that it will be open to be attended by members
of the Research Advisory Committee, all faculty members of the department,
research scholars and other interested experts/ researchers, besides the
Research Supervisor and Expert(s)/Examiner(s), as applicable. It is also
imperative on the part of the university to maintain due record of the same,
including the report signed by Expert(s)/ Examiner(s) appointed for conducting the
same.

13. The M.Phil. or Ph.D. students, whose maximum period for submission of M. Phil./
Ph.D. Dissertation/ Thesis prescribed under relevant rules/ regulations/ ordinances
of the concerned universities is expired/ expiring during the Corona pandemic
period, may be allowed to submit their Dissertation/ Thesis, including completion
of pending formalities, within six months from the date of expiry of regular
prescribed period. The extension of six months may also be considered for those
students who are yet to submit their Dissertation/ Thesis.

14.Every University shall establish a cell for handling student grievances related to
examinations and academic activities during COVID-19 pandemic and notify
effectively to the students.

15.The UGC will establish a Help Line for monitoring student grievances related to
examinations and academic activities during COVID-19 pandemic.
--- Page 10 ---
ACADEMIC CALENDAR

1. The following calendar is suggested for the academic session 2019-2020:

The Academic Calendar is suggestive in nature. The universities may adopt / adapt it
after making a comprehensive assessment of their level of preparedness, residential
status of the students, status of COVID-19 pandemic spread in their city / region /
state and other factors.

Start of Even Semester 01.01.2020

Suspension of Classes 16.03.2020

Continuation of Teaching-Learning through | 16.03.2020 to 31.05.2020
various modes such as Online Learning /
Distance Learning / Social Media (WhatsApp /
YouTube) / E-mails / Video Conferencing /
Mobile Apps / SWAYAMPRABHA Channels on
DTH etc.

Finalisation of Dissertation/ Project Work/ | 01.06.2020 to 15.06.2020
Internship Reports/ E-labs/ Completion of
Syllabus/ Internal Assessment/ Assignment/
Students Placement Drive etc.

Summer Vacations # 16.06.2020 to 30.06.2020
Conduct of Examinations:

(i) Terminal Semester/ Year 01.07.2020 to 15.07.2020

(ii) Intermediate Semester/Year 16.07.2020 to 31.07.2020
Evaluation and Declaration of Result:

(i) Terminal Semester/ Year 31.07.2020

(ii) Intermediate Semester/ Year 14.08.2020

# _ If situation so demands, the universities can have Summer Vacations for 30 days
from 01-06-2020 to 30-06-2020. In that case the teaching-learning through various
modes can be held up to 15-05-2020 and subsequently Finalization of Dissertation
etc. may be completed from 16-05-2020 to 31-05-2020.

2. The universities should develop a fool-proof plan before the resumption of
session, strictly following the norms of “social distancing” and other required
precautions, to avoid any eventuality arising due to COVID-19.

8
--- Page 11 ---
3. Admissions to the UG and PG programmes for the session 2020-21 may be
completed by 31.08.2020. If necessity arises, provisional admissions may also be
made and relevant documents of qualifying examination may be accepted up to
30.09.2020.

4. The Academic Session 2020-21 may commence from 01.8.2020 for old students
and from 01.09.2020 for fresh students.

The following calendar is suggested for the academic session 2020-2021:
Admission Process 01.08.2020 to 31.08.2020
Commencement of Classes

i. Students of 2°4/ 34 year 01.08.2020

ii. Fresh batch (First Semester/Year) 01.09.2020

Conduct of Examinations 01.01.2021 to 25.01.2021
Commencement of Classes for Even Semester 27.01.2021
Dispersal of Classes 25.05.2021
Conduct of Examinations 26.05.2021 to 25.06.2021
Summer Vacations 01.07.2021 to 30.07.2021
Commencement of Next Academic Session 02.08.2021

Some General Guidelines

1.

All the universities may follow a 6-day week pattern to compensate the loss for the
remaining session of 2019-20 and the next session 2020-21.

In view of the importance of “social distancing”, universities may take necessary
steps to ensure that the students are given exposure to laboratory assignments/
practical experiments through virtual laboratories, sharing of the recorded visuals
of laboratory work and digital resources available for the purpose. The link
provided by Ministry of Human Resource Development for virtual laboratories to
facilitate the students of science/ engineering/ technology streams may be suitable
for such purposes.

Every institute should develop virtual classroom and video conferencing facility
and all teaching staff should be trained with the use of the technology.

The universities should prepare e-content/e-lab experiments and upload the same
on their websites.

The universities should strengthen the mechanism of mentor-mentee counselling
through a dedicated portal on university website to impart timely guidance and
counselling to the students. Besides, the faculty advisor and supervisor assigned
to each student should maintain regular communication with the students.
--- Page 12 ---
6. The universities may devise a proforma to record the Travel/ Stay history of the
staff and students for the period when they were away from the university due to
lockdown, so that necessary precautions may be taken in specific cases, if
required. In addition, the universities will strictly comply with all precautions and
preventive measures to curb the spread of COVID -19.

7. In order to overcome such challenges in future, the faculty should be adequately
trained for the use of ICT and online teaching tools, so that they complete about
25% of the syllabus through online teaching and 75% syllabus through face to
face teaching.

8. In view of the present scenario and future uncertainties:

i. the universities may adopt and implement these Guidelines in a
transparent manner by making alterations/ additions/ modifications/
amendments to deal with particular situation(s) in the best interest of
students, educational institution and the entire education system,

ii. if the university faces difficulty in making admissions as per the existing
policy, it may adopt alternative modes of admission process, if otherwise
legally tenable, and

iii. In case of educational institutions located at places where the
Government (Centre/ State) have imposed restrictions on gathering of
public, the institutions may plan accordingly. In any case, the above
recommendations shall not cause any restrictions on _ the
guidelines/directions issued by the appropriate Government/competent
authority.

Notwithstanding the above Guidelines regarding the resumption of session,
conduct of examinations and commencement of next academic session, every
university/ college has to ensure that it is prepared in all respects to carry out the
academic activities following necessary advisories/guidelines/directions issued by
the Central/State Government, MHRD or UGC from time to time to prevent the
spread of COVID-19.

10
--- Page 13 ---
Acknowledgement

The Guidelines on Examinations and Academic Calendar for the Universities, in view of
COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown, has been prepared on the basis of the
Report of the Expert Committee constituted by the University Grants Commission under
the Chairmanship of Prof. R. C. Kuhad, Former Member, UGC and Vice Chancellor,
Central University of Haryana, Mahendergarh, Haryana along with members which
includes Prof. A. C. Pandey, Director, Inter University Accelerator Centre, New Delhi;
Prof. Aditya Shastri, Vice Chancellor, Banasthali Vidyapith, Banasthali, Rajasthan; Prof.
Raj Kumar, Vice Chancellor, Panjab University, Chandigarh; Prof. Upinder Dhar, Vice
Chancellor, Shri Vaishnav Vidyapeeth Vishwavidyalaya, Indore, M.P; Dr. Surender
Singh, Joint Secretary, University Grants Commission and Dr. Vikas Gupta, Joint
Secretary, University Grants Commission (Member Co-ordinator).

The Expert Committee also co-opted Prof. V. K. Jain, Vice Chancellor, Tezpur University,
Assam; Prof. G. D. Sharma, Vice Chancellor, Atal Bihari Vajpayee University, Bilaspur,
Chhatisgarh; Prof. Appa Rao Podile, Vice Chancellor, Central University of Hyderabad,
Telangana; Prof. Rajesh Kumar Malik, Dean, School of Law, Central University of
Haryana, Mahendergarh and Prof. Sanjiv Kumar, Dean Academics, Central University
of Haryana, Mahendergarh.

Dr. K. P. Singh, Former Joint Secretary, UGC and Dr. Diksha Rajput, Deputy Secretary,
UGC have made valuable contribution in the finalization of the Guidelines.

The document has been fine-tuned with the necessary support and relevant inputs
provided by Prof. Rajnish Jain, Secretary, University Grants Commission.

The Commission approved the document at its meeting held on 27.4.2020 through Video
Conferencing.

UGC sincerely acknowledges and appreciates the valuable contribution of all the
members of the Expert Committee and other UGC officials.

11