--- Page 1 ---
MOA / Rules & Regulations of
Rathinam Global “Deemed To Be University”, Coimbatore
(Deemed to be University under section 3 of the UGC Act, 1956)
Vide provisions contained in the UGC
(Institutions Deemed to be Universities)

Regulations-2019

1. NAME: The name of the Society/Trust shall be

Rathinam Global Foundation

2, Name of the Institution Deemed To Be University

Rathinam Global

3. OFFICE OF THE SOCIETY/TRUST AND DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITY

Rathinam Techzone, Eachanari, Coimbatore-64102 1, Tamil Nadu

4, DEFINITIONS:

In these Memorandum of Association and Rules of the Deemed to be University, unless the

context otherwise requires

4.1 “Academic Council” means the academic council of the institution deemed to be University;

4.2 “Act” means the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956);

4.3 “affiliated college” means a college recognised by, associated with and admitted to the
privileges of a University;

4.4 “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of a Department of the institution deemed
to be University;

4.5 “campus” means campus (single or multiple locations within the city) of the institution
deemed to be University wherein its facilities, faculty, staff, students, and Academic
Departments are situated;

4.6 “centre” means a centre of studies of the institution deemed to be University;

4.7 “Chancellor”, “Vice-Chancellor”, and “Pro-Vice-Chancellor” means the Chancellor, Vice-
Chancellor and Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the institution deemed to be University, respectively;

4.8 “college” means any institution whether affiliated college or constituent college, known as
such or by any other name and provides undergraduate or postgraduate or Ph.D.
programmes or all together, for obtaining any qualification froma University, in accordance
with the rules and regulations of such University, which has been recognised as competent
by the University Grants Commission to provide such programmes or courses of study;

4.9 “Commission” means the University Grants Commission (UGC) constituted under the Act;

4.10 “constituent college” means a college operating under the administrative, academic, and

financial control of the sponsoring body;
--- Page 2 ---
4.11 “constituent unit" means an academic unit (Schools or centres or departments) of the
institution existing on the date of submission of a proposal to declare an institution to be
an institution deemed to be University;

4.12 “Department” means a department of studies of the institution deemed to be University;

4.13 “distinct category” means an existing institution or an institution Starting from the
beginning with the focus on teaching or research in the unique disciplines or addressing
the strategic needs of the country or engaged in the preservation of Indian cultural
heritage or preservation of the environment or dedicated to skill development or
dedicated to sports or languages or any other discipline, as so determined by the Expert
Committee approved by the Chairman of the Commission;

4.14 “Executive Council” means the executive council of the institution deemed to be
University;

4.15 "Expert Committee" means a committee consisting of academics and other experts from
other fields and includes representatives of the statutory bodies and approved by the
Chairman of the Commission;

4.16 “Government” means the Department in the Ministry of Education in the Central
Government dealing with the higher education;

4.17 “institution” means an institution of higher education engaged in teaching and research
at the undergraduate, post-graduate or higher level;

4.18 "institution deemed to be University" means an institution of higher education so
declared by the Central Government by notification under section 3 of the Act, on the
advice of the Commission;

4.19 “main campus” means the campus of the institution deemed to be University, where its
major facilities, faculty, staff, students, academic departments and administration are
situated;

4.20 MoA/Rules means Memorandum of Association and/or Rules of (name of the Institution
Deemed to be University).

4.21 "NAAC" means the National Assessment and Accreditation Council;

4.22 "NBA" means the National Board of Accreditation;

4.23 “necessary infrastructure" means the infrastructure required under the norms of the
concerned statutory body or the Commission, as the case may be;

4.24 “NEP” means the National Education Policy, 2020;

4.25 “NIRF" means the National Institutional Ranking Framework;

4.26 “notification” means a notification issued by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette declaring an institution of higher education, as an institution deemed to be
University under section 3 of the Act;

4.27 “off-campus” means the premises of the institution deemed to be University, approved by
the Government, other than the main campus or the campuses;

4.28 “off-shore campus" means the premises of the institution deemed to be University,
approved by the Government, outside India, other than the main campus in India;

4.29 "processing fee" means the fee to be paid by the applicant institution to the Commission

along with the application for processing such application;
--- Page 3 ---
4.30 “Regulations” means the University Grants Commission (Institutions deemed to be
Universities) Regulations, 2023.

4.31 “school” or “faculty” means a school or faculty of studies of the institution deemed to be
University;

4.32 “sponsoring body" means a body being a charitable or a not-for-profit society or trust or
a company under section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), submitting an
application for declaring an institution under its administrative, academic and financial
control as an institution deemed to be University;

4.33 "Standing Committee" means a committee consisting of academics and other experts from
other fields and includes representatives of the statutory bodies and approved by the
Chairman of the Commission;

4.34 “statutory body” means a body constituted under any law for the time being in force for
determining or maintaining standards of quality in the relevant areas of higher education,
including the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), the Bar Council of India
(BCI), the Dental Council of India (DCI), the Indian Nursing Council (INC), the National
Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and the National Medical Commission (NMC), or
any other statutory body established under an Act of Parliament;

4.35 "teacher" means professors, associate professors, assistant professors and such other
academic staff as may be appointed for imparting instructions or conducting research in
the institution deemed to be University including the adjunct faculty or professor of
practice or visiting faculty; and

4.36 The words and expressions used in these regulations and not defined, but defined in the

Act shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them.

5. OBJECTIVES
Objectives of an institution deemed to be University
5.1. The objectives of the institution deemed to be University shall be to
5.2. provide for higher education leading to excellence and innovations in such branches of
knowledge as may be deemed fit, primarily at undergraduate, post-graduate, and research
degree levels, fully conforming to the concept of a University;
5.3. engage in inter-disciplinary or multi-disciplinary or trans-disciplinary teaching and
research in addition to domain-specific specialisation;
5.4. provide for high-quality teaching and research recognised nationally and globally;
5.5. recognise, identify and foster the unique capabilities of each student, by sensitising
teachers as well as parents to promote each student’s holistic development;
5.6. provide multi-disciplinary and a holistic education in the faculties of science, engineering,
technology, social sciences, arts, humanities, sports and other disciplines;
5.7. transform into research and teaching intensive University over a period of time;
5.8. focus on research and innovation by setting up start-up incubation centers; technology
development centres; centres in frontier areas of research; greater industry-academic
linkages; and inter-disciplinary research including humanities and social sciences

research;
--- Page 4 ---
5.9. provide flexible and innovative curriculum, which includes credit-based courses and
projects in the areas of community engagement and service, environmental education,
value-based education, etc.;

5.10. contribute for social transformation through socially responsive teaching, learning,

research, and fieldwork;

5.11. adopt the provisions of NEP, 2020; and

5.12. strengthen the research ecosystem by establishing Research and Development Cell
(RDC);

5.13. possess such academic and physical infrastructure as may be specified by the Commission
or the relevant statutory body, as the case may be;

5.14. have teacher-student ratio of 1:20 with a minimum combined faculty strength of not less
than one hundred and fifty teachers and a minimum combined student strength of three
thousand on rolls under the regular classroom mode, of which not less than one fifth
being post-graduate or research or as per the norms of the relevant statutory body; and

5.15. Shall have an administrative area, library, lecture halls, labs, hostels, health care, common
facilities and recreational facilities.

6. Corpus Fund

6.0. Acorpus fund of rupees twenty-five crores or as decided by the Commission from time to
time, shall be created and maintained in the name of the institution deemed to be
University;

6.1. The interest accrued on the corpus fund shall be used only for the purpose of further
development of the institution deemed to be University; and

6.2. Institutions deemed to be Universities may invest the corpus fund in any suitable scheme
or schemes.

7. Off-campus centres

7.1. (i) Institutions deemed to be Universities with minimum ‘A’ grade and above or ranked
from 1 to 100 in the "Universities" category of NIRF rankings of the relevant year are
eligible to set up off-campus centres.

(ii) Institutions declared as deemed to be Universities under “distinct category” may apply
for off campuses after five years of their declaration, if they fulfill the criteria specified
in clause (i).

7.2. The Institution Deemed to be University shall have the infrastructure at the proposed off-
campus centres in accordance with the norms and standards specified by the relevant
statutory body or the Commission, as the case may be, and the Institute shall start the off-
campus centre with a minimum of five under-graduate or post-graduate or research or
combination thereof with a minimum of one thousand students, of which not less than
one-fifth of the students shall be post-graduate or research students with fifty teachers
and with required infrastructure facilities.

7.3. The Government may withdraw the approval granted for starting the off-campus centre if
at any time, it is found that the information provided by the institution deemed to be

University is incorrect and in order to protect the interests of students enrolled at such
--- Page 5 ---
centre, the institution deemed to be University shall take necessary action for shifting of
such students to the main campus.

7.4. The Institution deemed to be University shall start new courses or programmes in any field
in their existing campus and approved off-campus centres only with the prior approval of
its Executive Council and also, wherever applicable, with the approval of the relevant
statutory bodies:

8. Off-shore campus

8.1. Institutions deemed to be Universities may start or establish off-shore campuses with the
prior approval of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
rules and regulations made thereunder.

8.2. Existing off-shore campuses shall continue to operate, provided they have obtained proper
permissions and approval.

9. Monitoring

9.1. The Commission shall monitor the performance and academic outcomes of the institutions

deemed to be Universities

9.2, The Commission shall decide on the physical verification of an institution deemed to be

University or constitute teams for such verification on its own or upon receipt of any

complaint against the accuracy and veracity of the information submitted to the

Commission and also hosted on the website of the institution.

10. Governance
10.1. The Institution deemed to be University shall be registered as a not-for profit society

under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or asa not-for-profit trust under
the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or as.a not-for-profit company registered under
section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013):
PROVIDED that a sponsoring body exclusively established for running educational
institutions shall be exempted from registering as a separate not-for-profit society or
trust or a company and the sponsoring body shall specifically mention in its registration
deed that the sponsoring body is exclusively for running educational activities and no
other activities are being carried out or shall be carried out in the future under it:
PROVIDED further that if the sponsoring body of an existing institution deemed to be
University does not have a society or trust or company exclusively for running
educational institutions, it shall form a new not-for-profit society or trust or company,
for the purposes of institution deemed to be University and in such cases, the sponsoring
body shall be exempted from transferring its moveable and immovable assets to the
newly created society or trust or company, if such sponsoring body provides a notarised
affidavit to the effect that the entire moveable and immovable assets allocated to the
institution deemed to be University shall not be leased or otherwise disposed of without
the prior permission of the Commission:
PROVIDED also that the sponsoring body shall make available the necessary
infrastructure for operating the institution deemed to be University without any rental

or other such charges.
--- Page 6 ---
11.

12.

10.2. All moveable and immovable assets of the institution deemed to be University shall be
used for the purposes of conducting academic activities, promotion of research and
related administrative requirements of the institution deemed to be University, including
the outreach educational activities.

10.3. The highest governing body of the institution deemed to be University shall be the
Executive Council to be headed by the Vice-Chancellor and consisting of not less than ten
and not more than thirteen members.

10.4. The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the institution deemed to
be University

10.5. The composition of the Executive Council shall be as under -

a) Vice-Chancellor - Chairperson;

b) Pro-Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable);

c) two members from amongst the Deans of schools of studies, by rotation, to be
appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;

d) one Professor, who is not a Dean, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;
e) one Associate Professor, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;

f) one Assistant Professor, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;

g) one representative shall be nominated by the Commission;

h) up to four nominees of the Sponsoring body; and

i) the Registrar, who shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Executive Council.

Tenure of the members of Executive Council

All the members of the Executive Council, other than the Vice-Chancellor and Pro-Vice-

Chancellor, shall hold office for a term of three years and in the case of Deans, the term shall be

three years or until they hold the office of Dean, whichever is earlier.

Members of the Executive Council appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from Professor, Associate

Professor and Assistant Professor category shall hold office for a period of one year or till such

time they cease to be teachers of the University, whichever is earlier.

Powers and limitations of Executive Council

12.1. The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of the
institution deemed to be University.

12.2. The Executive Council shall be the final decision-making body of the institution deemed
to be University in respect of every matter of the institution deemed to be University,
including academic, administrative, personnel, financial, and developmental matters.

12.3. Subject to the provisions of these regulations and the rules of the institution deemed to
be University, the Executive Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have
the following powers, namely :—

a) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other
academic staff, including Chairs, as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the
Selection Committee constituted for the said purpose and to fill up temporary
vacancies therein;

b) to regulate and enforce discipline amongst the employees of the institution in
accordance with the rules of the institution deemed to be University;

6
--- Page 7 ---
c) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,
Professor of Practice, Consultants, Scholars, etc., and determine the terms and
conditions of such appointments;

d) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred
or imposed on it by the rules and regulations of the institution deemed to be
University;

e) to make rules and regulations for the institution deemed to be University; and

13. Meetings of Executive Council
13.1. The Executive Council shall meet at least four times a year (minimum two in one semester),
with not less than seven days’ prior notice given before every meeting of the Executive
Council and emergency meetings may be convened at a shorter notice, for reasons to be
recorded in writing for such emergency meeting.

13.2. One-third of the total number of members of the Executive Council shall form the quorum
for the meeting.

13.3. In the absence of the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice Chancellor shall preside. over the
meeting; and where there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor in an institution deemed to be
University, a member chosen by the other members of the Executive Counsel present at
the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.

13.4. Every member of the Executive Council including the Chairperson, shall have one vote
and the decisions at the meetings of the Executive Council shall be taken by simple
majority; and in case of a tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote.

13.5. Any business, which may be urgent in nature, may be carried out by circulation amongst
its members.

13.6. A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be furnished to the Chancellor of the
institution deemed to be University, as soon as possible after the convening of the
meeting.

14. Delegation of powers of Executive Council

The Executive Council may, by a resolution, delegate to the Vice Chancellor or any other officer

or faculty or to a Committee of officers or faculties of the institution deemed to be University,

such powers as it may deem fit, subject to the condition that the action taken by the Vice-

Chancellor or the officer or faculty or the Committee in the exercise of the powers so delegated,

shall be reported at the next meeting of the Executive Council.

15. Other authorities of institution deemed to be University
A. Academic Council:

15.1. The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the institution deemed to
be University and shall, subject to the provision of the rules of the institution deemed to
be University, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policy of
the institution deemed to be University.

15,2. The composition of the Academic Council shall be as under
(i) Vice Chancellor - Chairperson;

(ii) Pro Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable);
--- Page 8 ---
(iii) D.
a)

eans of faculties of the schools and heads of the departments or centres;
up to ten Professors (excluding those who are Deans of schools and heads of
departments or centres) by rotation, to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor
giving due regard to the representation of different schools or departments or

centres;

b) up to five Associate Professors from departments or centres other than the heads

c)

d)

e)

of the departments or centres, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor;
up to five Assistant Professors from the departments or centres other than the
heads of the departments or centres, by rotation, to be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor;

six persons of repute from amongst the educationists or experts for their
specialised knowledge, who are not in the service of the institution deemed to be
University, nominated by the Vice Chancellor; and

the Registrar, who shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Academic Council.

15.3. The representation of different categories shall be through rotation and not through an

electi

on and the term of members, other than the ex-officio members, shall be three years

and the Controller of Examination shall be the permanent invitee to the meetings of the

Academic Council.

B. Powers and.
Subject to

University,

Functions of Academic Council:
the provisions of these regulations and rules of the institution deemed to be

the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the

following powers, namely:

to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the institution deemed to be

University and to give directions regarding methods of instruction, co-ordination of teaching

among departments or faculties or schools or centers, evaluation of research and improvement

of academic standards;

to bring ab

out and promote inter-departmental, inter-faculty, inter-school, inter-center co-

ordination and to establish or appoint such committees or boards, as may be deemed necessary

for the purpose;

a)

b)

qd)
e)

to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative, or on
a reference by a department or faculty or school or centre or the Executive Council,
and to take appropriate action thereon;

to prescribe courses or programmes of study leading to degree and diploma of the
institution deemed to be University;

to make arrangements for the conduct of examinations in conformity with the rules
and bye-laws of the institution deemed to be University;

to maintain proper standards of the examination;

to recognise diplomas and degrees of Universities and other Institutions and to
determine equivalence with the diplomas and degrees of the institution deemed to
be University;

to institute Fellowships, Scholarships, Medals, Prizes, etc;
--- Page 9 ---
8) to frame rules covering the academic functioning of the institution deemed to be
University, admissions, examinations, award of fellowships and studentships, free-
ships, concessions, attendance, discipline, residence, etc.;

h) to take a periodical review of the activities of the departments or centres and to
take appropriate action to maintain and improve the standards of instruction;

i) to recommend the institution of teaching posts (Professors, Associate Professors,
and Assistant Professors) to the Executive Council;

j) to make recommendations to the Executive Council for the establishment or
abolition of departments or centres or schools or faculties, etc.

k) to make recommendations to the Executive Council; and

1) to exercise such other powers and to perform such other duties, as may be
conferred or imposed upon it by the rules of the institution deemed to be
University.

15.4. Meeting of Academic Council

1. The Academic Council shall meet as often as necessary but not less than four times (at
least two times in a semester) during an academic year with not less than seven days
prior notice being given before every meeting of the Academic Council and emergency
meetings may be convened at a shorter notice, for reasons to be recorded in writing for
such emergency meeting.

2. One-third of the total number of members of the Academic Council shall constitute the
quorum for the meeting of the Academic Council.

3. Each member, including its Chairperson, shall have one vote, and decisions at the
meetings of the Academic Council shall be taken by simple majority; and in case of a tie,
the Chairperson shall have a casting vote.

4. Any business that may be necessary for the Academic Council to perform, which may be
urgent in nature, may be carried out by circulation amongst its members.

16. Finance Committee
16.1. The composition of the Finance Committee shall be

a) Vice Chancellor - Chairperson;

b) Pro Vice-Chancellor (wherever applicable);

c) one person nominated by the society or trust or company, as the case may be
(wherever applicable);

d) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one
shall be a member of the Executive Council;

e) One representative shall be nominated by the Commission;

f)_ three persons to be nominated by the Chancellor;

g) Finance Officer-Secretary- ex officio

16.2. All members of the Finance Committee other than ex-officio member shall hold office for
a term of three years.
16.3. The Finance Committee shall meet at least four times in an academic year (at least twice
each semester) to examine the accounts and scrutinise the proposals for expenditure and
9
--- Page 10 ---
one-third of the total number of members of the Finance Committee shall form the

quorum for a meeting.

16.4. All proposals relating to the creation of posts and those items which have not been

included in the Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before the Executive
Council considers them and to decide waiver in fees, the establishment of scholarships,

freeship and any other financial benefits.

16.5, The annual accounts and financial estimates of the institution deemed to be University

prepared by the Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for
consideration and comments and thereafter the same shall be submitted to the Executive

Council for approval.

16.6. The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring and non-recurring

expenditures for the year, based on the income and resources of the institution deemed

to be University.

17. Board of Studies

17.1. Theré shall be one Board of Studies for each department or school of the institution

17.2

17.3

17.4.

deemed to be University. The composition of the Board of Studies shall be
(i) Dean of school or Head of the department - Chairperson;
(ii) all Professors of the school or department;
(iti) two Associate Professors of the school or department, by rotation;
(iv) two Assistant Professors of the school or department, by rotation; and

(v) two external experts to be co-opted for their specialised knowledge.

. Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of a

Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other
requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in
such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the institution deemed to be University
regarding—

(a) courses of studies;

(b}) appointment of supervisors for research; and

(c) Measures for the improvement of the standards of teaching and research.

. The powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be prescribed by the rules of the

institution deemed to be University.

Selection Committee for appointment of teaching staff—There shall be one or more
Selection Committees constituted, for making recommendations to the Executive Council
for appointment to the post of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and
such other posts as may be prescribed, in accordance with the University Grants
Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance of Standards

in Higher Education) Regulations,2018.

10
--- Page 11 ---
18. Disqualification

18.1. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the
authorities, or being appointed as, and for being, an officer, of the institution deemed to
be University if

a) if he or she is of unsound mind; or
b) if he or she is an un-discharged insolvent; or
c) ifhe or she has been convicted by a court of law for an offense
involving moral turpitude and
d) sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months; or
e) if he or she has not been appointed as per the provisions of these regulations.

18.2. If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the
disqualifications mentioned above, the question shall be referred to the Chancellor, and
his or her decision shall be final and no suit or other proceedings shall lie in any civil
court against such decision.

19. Miscellaneous matters relating to different authorities

19.1. If any question arises, as to whether any person, other than Government nominated or
appointed, has been duly nominated or appointed as, or is, entitled to be a member of
any authority or any committee of the institution deemed to be University, the matter
shall be referred to the Chancellor, whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.

19.2. Any member, other than an ex-officio member of any authority, may resign by a letter
addressed to the Registrar, and the resignation shall take effect as soon as it is accepted
by the Chancellor or the Chairperson of the Executive Council, as the case may be.

19.3. Sudden vacancies among the members of any authority or any Committee of the
institution deemed to be University shall be filled by the respective authority, as soon as
may be, and within a period of six months.

20. Officers of institution deemed to be University
A. Chancellor:

(1) The Chancellor shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of assuming office
and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by following the procedure
prescribed for the appointment of the Chancellor:

PROVIDED that the Chancellor in the institutions deemed to be Universities shall be
appointed by the sponsoring body.

(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his or her office, be the head of the institution deemed to
be University and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the institution deemed to
be University held for conferring degrees.

B. Vice-Chancellor:

(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the institution deemed to be
University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor from a panel of three names suggested
by a Search-cum-Selection Committee.

(2) The qualifications of the Vice-Chancellor shall be in accordance with the University Grants

Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other Academic

11
--- Page 12 ---
Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in
Higher Education) Regulations, 2018.
(3) The procedure for composition of Search-cum-Selection-Committee (SCSC) for the
selection of Vice Chancellor shall be as under
(i) a nominee of the Chancellor, who shall be a reputed academician as the Chairperson of
the Committee;

(ii) a nominee of the Chairman, University Grants Commission; and

(iii) an academician, with not less than ten years’ service as Professor, nominated by the
Executive Council.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he or
she enters upon his or her office or until he or she attains the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by following
the procedure prescribed for the appointment of Vice-Chancellor:

Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he or she shall
continue in office until his or her successor is appointed and enters upon his or her office,
however, in no case, the Vice-Chancellor shall hold office beyond the age of seventy years:
Provided further that the Chancellor may direct the Vice-Chancellor, after his or her term
has expired, to continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year.

(5) If the office of the Vice-Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise,
or if he or she is unable to perform his or her duties due to ill health or any other cause, the
Pro-Vice- Chancellor shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor:

Provided that if the Pro-Vice-Chancellor is unavailable, the Chancellor shall appoint the
senior most Professor who shall perform the duties of the Vice-Chancellor, until a new Vice-
Chancellor assumes office or the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes the duties of his or her
office, as the case may be.

C. Powers and duties of Vice-Chancellor

(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Principal Executive Officer and academic officer of the
institution deemed to be University and shall exercise general supervision and control

over the affairs of the institution deemed to be University and give effect to the decision of
all authorities of the institution deemed to be University.

(2) The Vice-Chancellor may, if he or she is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary
on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the institution deemed to
be University by or under these regulations and shall report to such authority at its next
meeting the action taken by him or her on such matter:

PROVIDED that, ifthe authority mentioned in this sub-regulation is of the opinion that such
action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to the Chancellor whose
decision thereon shall be final:

PROVIDED further that any person in the service of the institution deemed to be University
who is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this regulation shall
have the right to represent against such action to the Executive Council within ninety days
from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to him and thereupon the
Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor.

12
--- Page 13 ---
(3) The Vice-Chancellor, if he or she is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the
institution deemed to be University is beyond the power of the authority conferred by the
provisions of these regulations or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the
institution deemed to be University, may ask the authority concerned to review its decision
within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision either
in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the
matter shall be referred to the
Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be final.

(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Executive Council, the
Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor,
preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees to the students.

(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any
authority or other body of the institution deemed to be University, but shall not be entitled
to vote unless he or she is a member of such authority or body.

(6) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that these regulations are duly observed
and implemented and he or she shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such
implementation.

(7) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of
discipline in the institution deemed to be University, and he or she may delegate any such
powers to such person or persons, as he or she may deem fit.

(8) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings
of the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee, and other
authorities.

D. Removal of Vice-Chancellor

(1) Where there are reasons to believe that the Vice-Chancellor of an institution deemed to be
University does not possess the qualifications as required under the University Grants
Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in
Higher Education) Regulations, 2018, or is not appointed as per the procedure stipulated
in these regulations or has committed any financial or administrative impropriety, the
Chairman of Commission shall constitute an enquiry committee consisting of academic,

administrative or financial experts to enquire into the matter.

(2) On the directions from the Commission, the Chancellor shall place the Vice-Chancellor
under suspension, pending an enquiry.

(3) The enquiry committee shall give an opportunity of hearing to the Vice-Chancellor before
submitting its report to the Commission and where the report of the enquiry committee
confirms the ineligibility or procedural violations or impropriety, as the case may be, the
Commission shall direct the Chancellor to remove the Vice Chancellor by following due
procedure:

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations, the Chancellor may, at any time

after the Vice Chancellor has entered upon his or her office, by order in writing, remove the

13
--- Page 14 ---
Vice- Chancellor from office on the grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of these
regulations:
PROVIDED that the Chancellor shall make no such order unless the Vice-Chancellor has
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be
taken against him:
PROVIDED further that the Chancellor may, at any time before making such order, place
the Vice- Chancellor under suspension, pending an inquiry.

E. Pro-Vice-Chancellor

(1) On the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, the Executive Council shall appoint a

Professor as Pro-Vice-Chancellor to discharge the duties of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor in
addition to his or her duties as a Professor:
PROVIDED further that where the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor is not accepted
by the Executive Council, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor, who may either
appoint the Professor recommended by the Vice-Chancellor or ask the Vice-Chancellor to
recommend name of another Professor for re-consideration by the Executive Council.

(2) The term of office of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the
Executive Council, but it shall not, in any case, exceed five years or until the expiration of
the term of office of the Vice-Chancellor, whichever is earlier:

PROVIDED that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible
for re-appointment by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of Pro-
Vice-Chancellor:

PROVIDED further that the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the
Vice- Chancellor, continue in office, notwithstanding the expiration of his or her term of
office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until the Vice Chancellor resumes office or a new Vice-
Chancellor assumes office, as the case may be:

PROVIDED also that, in any case, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age
of sixty-five years.

(3) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall have the powers and duties as may be prescribed by the rules
of the institution deemed to be University.

(4) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in respect of such matters as may
be specified by the Vice-Chancellor on this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise
such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice-
Chancellor.

F. Registrar
(1) (a) The Registrar shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the institution deemed to be
University and shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations
of the selection committee consisting of the following:
(i) Vice-Chancellor - Chairperson;
(ii) one nominee of the Chancellor;
(iii) two members of the Executive Council nominated by it; and
{iv) one expert not in the service of the University to be nominated by the Executive
Council.
14
--- Page 15 ---
(b) The meeting of the selection committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, and
subject to the convenience of the Chancellor’s nominee and the experts nominated by
the Executive Council and the proceedings of the selection committee shall not be valid
unless at least three of the Chancellor’s nominees or persons nominated by the
Executive Council attended the meeting.

(2) The Registrar shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of assuming office and
shall be eligible for re-appointment for a second term by following the procedure
prescribed for Registrar:

PROVIDED that, the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years and the
emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as
may be prescribed by the rules of the institution deemed to be University.

(3) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness,
absence, or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his or her office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the
purpose.

(4) The Registrar shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Executive Council and the Academic
Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.

(5) The Registrar shall be directly responsible to the Vice-Chancellor and work under his or her
direction.

(6) The Registrar shall have the power to take disciplinary action against employees, excluding
teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on
them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:

PROVIDED that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in
regard to him or her.

(7) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any
of the penalties specified in sub-regulation (6).

(8) In the case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar
is called for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the
Vice- Chancellor along with his or her recommendations:

PROVIDED that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice-
Chancellor imposing any penalty.

(9) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—

(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal, and such other property of the
institution deemed to be University as the Executive Council shall commit to his or
her charge;

(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic
Council, and any Committees appointed by those authorities;

(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic

Council, and any Committees appointed by those authorities;
--- Page 16 ---
(d) to conduct the official correspondence between the Executive Council and the
Academic Council;

(e) to supply to the Chancellor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of
the institution deemed to be University as soon as they are issued and the minutes
of such meetings;

(4) to represent the institution deemed to be University in suits or proceedings by or
against the University, sign powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his
or her representative for the purpose;

(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the rules of the institution
deemed to be University or as may be required from time to time by the Executive
Council or the Vice-Chancellor, as the case may be;

(h) to enter into an agreement, sign documents, and authenticate records on behalf of
the institution deemed to be University;

(i) to make arrangements to safeguard and maintain the buildings, gardens, office,
canteen, cars and other vehicles, laboratories, libraries, reading rooms, equipment
and other properties of the institution deemed to be University; and {j) to conduct
the official correspondence on behalf of the authorities of the institution deemed to
be University.

G, Finance Officer

(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations
of a selection committee constituted for the purpose and he or she shall be a whole-time
salaried officer of the institution deemed to be University.

(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re-
appointment by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of the Finance
Officer:

Provided that, the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two years.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.

(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his or her office, the
duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint
for the purpose,

(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Finance Committee but shall not be
deemed to be a member of such Committee.

(6) The Finance Officer shall—

(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the institution deemed to be University
and shall advise it as regards its financial policy; and

(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive
Council or as may be prescribed by the rules of the institution deemed to be University.

(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall—

16
--- Page 17 ---
a. ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive-Council for recurring and non-
recurring expenditures for a year are not exceeded and that all amounts of money
are expended on the purpose for which they are granted or allotted;

b. be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the
institution deemed to be university and for their presentation to the Executive
Council;

c. keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state
of investments;

d. watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advice on the methods of
collection employed;

e. ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture, and equipment are
maintained and up-to-date and that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment and
other consumable materials in all offices, departments, schools, faculties, centers
and specialised laboratories;

f. bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor un-authorised expenditure and other
financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;

g. call for from any office, department, school, faculty, centre, laboratory, etc.
maintained by the institution deemed to be University any information or returns
that he or she may consider necessary for the performance of his or her duties; and

h. work under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and shall be responsible to the
Executive Council through the Vice-Chancellor.

H. Controller of Examinations

(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the
recommendations of a selection committee constituted for the purpose and he or she shall
be a whole-time salaried officer of the institution deemed to be University.

(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be
eligible for reappointment by following the procedure prescribed for the appointment of
Controller of Examination:

Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-two
years.

(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of Examination
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.

(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller of
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the
duties of his or her office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the
Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.

(5) The Controller of Examination shall arrange for and superintend the examinations of the
institution deemed to be University in the manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the
institution deemed to be University.

(6) The Controller of Examinations shall be a permanent invitee to the Academic Council.

17
--- Page 18 ---
(7) The Controller of Examinations shall ensure that all the specific directions of the Executive
Council, Academic Council and Vice-Chancellor in respect of examination and evaluation
are complied with.

I. Dean

(1) The Departments dealing with allied subjects may be grouped into faculties or schools, etc.,
and every faculty shall be headed by a Dean.

(2) Every Dean of the school or faculty shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst
the Professors in the school or faculty, by rotation, for a period of two years:

PROVIDED that if there is only one Professor or no Professor in a school or faculty, the Dean
shall be appointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professor, if any, and the Associate
Professors in the school or faculty.

(3) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or
any other cause, unable to perform duties of his or her office, the duties of the office shall
be performed by the senior-most Professor or Associate Professor, as the case may be, in
the School.

(4) The Dean shall be the Head of the school or faculty or centre and shall be responsible for
the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the school or
faculty or centre and shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by the rules of
the institution deemed to be University.

(5) The Dean shall have the right to present and speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies
or Committees of the school or faculty or centre, as the case may be, but shall not have the
right to vote there unless he is a member thereof.

J. Head of the Department

(1) There shall be a Head of the Department or chairperson of the centre for each of the
department or centre in the institution deemed to be University, who shall be appointed
by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Professors of the department or centre:
PROVIDED that if there is no Professor in the department or centre or there is only one
Professor in the department or centre, whose term as Head of the department or
chairperson of the centre is ending, the Vice Chancellor may appoint an Associate
Professor as Head of the Department.

(2) The term of the Head of the department or chairperson of the centre shall normally be two
years and he or she shall be eligible for re-appointment for one more term by following
the procedure prescribed for appointment of the Head of the department or chairperson
of the centre.

(3) The powers and functions of the Head of the department or chairperson of the centre shall
be prescribed by the rules of the institution deemed to be University.

21. Admission and fees structure
A. Admission

Admission of students to the institution deemed to be University shall be strictly based on

merit in the entrance exam conducted by a Government Testing Agency or the institution

deemed to be University and as prescribed by the appropriate statutory authority, wherever

18
--- Page 19 ---
applicable and in case of no entrance examination, the admission of students to the institution
deemed to be University may be made in the manner specified in the prospectus.
B. Fee structure

(1) Donation or capitation fee in whatever nomenclature or form, either directly or indirectly,
is strictly prohibited.

(2) The institutions deemed to be Universities shall follow the rules and regulations regarding
fee structure, number of seats, etc., issued by the relevant statutory bodies and in case an
institution deemed to be University offers different courses which come under the
regulatory ambit of different statutory bodies, namely the University Grants Commission,
the All India Council of Technical Education, National Medical Council etc., the rules and
regulations regarding fee structure, number of seats, etc., issued by such statutory body
concerned shall be applicable.

(3) The fee shall be fixed transparently, keeping in view non-profiteering or non-commercial
aspects,

(4) The fee shall be collected as declared in the prospectus of the institution deemed to be
University and with a proper receipt for such payment and the prospectus shall also state
that donation or capitation fee in whatever nomenclature or form, either directly or
indirectly, shall not be collected from the student or parent and in case of any grievance,
the student or parent may submit their complaint to the institution deemed to be
University.

(5) The institution deemed to be University may provide fee concession or scholarships or may
allocate some seats to meritorious students belonging to socially and economically
deprived groups of the society.

(6) The institution deemed to be University shall abide by all the University Grant Commission
notifications, guidelines regarding the refund of fees and return of original certificates, as
may be issued from time to time.

(7) Every institution deemed to be University shall maintain the records of the entire process
of selection of candidates, exhibit such records on its website, and preserve such records
for a minimum period of five years.

(8) The institution deemed to be University shall make available the prospectus on its website
at least sixty days before the commencement of admissions, including fee structure, refund
policy, number of seats in a programme, eligibility qualifications, admission process, etc.

(9) The institution deemed to be University shall not retain any original certificates of the
students, faculty members, and staff.

22. Institution deemed to be University open to all

(1) The institution deemed to be University shall be open to the persons of all genders and of
whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the institution deemed to
be University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or
profession in order to entitle him or her to be appointed as a faculty member of the
institution deemed to be University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as
a student in the institution deemed to be University or to graduate there at or to enjoy or
exercise any privilege thereof:

19
--- Page 20 ---
Pash,

24,

25.

26.

Die

28.

29.

PROVIDED that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the institution deemed
to be University from making special provision for the employment or admission of women,
persons with disabilities, or of persons belonging to the weaker section of the society and,
in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens.

(2) All policies and procedures, in matters of admission, fee, and employment as applicable to

the university level public funded and self-financing institutions, respectively, shall apply.

Institution deemed to be University to be unitary

The institution deemed to be University shall be unitary in nature and shall not affiliate any

other institution.

Reservation policy

Institution deemed to be University shall implement the policy on reservations in admissions

and recruitment, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of India and any Act of

Parliament for the time being in force and disclose all such information on its website.

Online or distance education

Institutions deemed to be Universities may offer courses online or distance courses or degrees

in accordance with the regulations notified by the Commission from time to time.

Institution deemed to be University to be unitary

The institution deemed to be University shall be unitary in nature and shall not affiliate any

other institution.

Reservation policy

Institution deemed to be University shall implement the policy on reservations in admissions

and recruitment, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of India and any Act of

Parliament for the time being in force and disclose all such information on its website.

Online or distance education

Institutions deemed to be Universities may offer courses online or distance courses or degrees

in accordance with the regulations notified by the Commission from time to time.

Power to conduct enquiry and consequences for violation of regulations —

29.1. Where the Government or the Commission, as the case may be, receives information by
way of a complaint or otherwise, that an institution deemed to be University has violated
any of the provisions of these regulations, it shall cause to conduct an enquiry into the
facts of such information after issuing a notice to the said effect to the institution deemed
to be University.

29,2. The Commission may also cause an inspection, to be made by experts in matters of
academics, administration, and finance regarding academic outcomes or any matter
connected with the administration or finances of the institution deemed to be University
for the purpose of the enquiry.

29.3. Based on the enquiry or through procedures mentioned in these regulations, if the
Government or the Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied that the regulations have
been violated, the institution deemed to be University shall be subjected to such action
as provided in the University Grants Commission (Institutions deemed to be
Universities) Regulations, 2023.

20
--- Page 21 ---
30. Funds, Accounts, Audit, and Annual Report

30.1. The books of accounts of the institution deemed to be University shall be maintained,

managed, and operated in the name of the institution deemed to be University and not in
the name of the sponsoring body or any other body; and, shall be kept in such form as
may be specified by the Executive Council and conform to the rules or regulations, if any,
prescribed by the Commission, in this regard.

30.2. Funds shall not be diverted at any time from the accounts of the institution deemed to be
University to any other accounts, including to the accounts of the sponsoring body or to
any other body.

30.3. The institution deemed to be University shall get its books of accounts audited annually,
separately published and uploaded on the website of the institution and the accounts of
institution deemed to be University shall also, where required, be open for inspection by
the Commission.

30.4. The annual financial statements and accounts shall be audited by a qualified professional,

a Member or Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, to be appointed
by the institution deemed to be University:
PROVIDED that, the Commission may, on receipt of information regarding financial
impropriety or embezzlement or illegal diversion of funds from the accounts of the
institution deemed to be University; or of fees being collected against the provisions of
these regulations, issue a notice directing the institution deemed to be University to
show cause as to why an inspection, including a forensic audit, not be ordered in respect
of the complaint, and after providing a reasonable opportunity to the respondent
institution, the Commission may on being satisfied that there were sufficient grounds to
proceed further, cause an inspection by a team of the Commission or may direct a
forensic audit; the report of and the inspection team and the forensic audit report taken
together shall form the basis for the Commission to take further action, as it may be deem
fit, under these regulations including the recommendation for withdrawal of institution
deemed to be University status, to the Government.

30.5. Annual Reports, Annual Financial Statements, and Audit Reports shall be uploaded on the
institution deemed to be University website and also on the Commission’s portal, after
due approval by the Executive Council.

31. Miscellaneous

31.1. The institution deemed to be University shall, as soon as may be, after the completion of
the academic programme, and in no case later than one hundred and eighty days from
the date of such completion, ensure that the degree, diploma, certificate, or any other
qualification in respect of the programme of studies, is awarded and made available to
students.

31.2. The institutions deemed to be Universities shall compulsorily create Academic Bank of
Credits (ABC), identities of their students and upload their credit scores in digital lockers
and ensure that the credit scores are reflected in ABC portal and adopt Samarth e-Gov.

21
--- Page 22 ---
31.3. The institution deemed to be University shall not at any time enter into any franchise
agreement or arrangement, either overtly or covertly, with any individual or
organisation for establishing, maintaining, or operating the off-campus or off-shore
campus or constituent units or course or programme of study or department or school
or faculty of the institution deemed to be University except in the following cases,
namely :

(a) the institution deemed to be University, which is eligible under sub-regulations

(4) and (2) of regulation 8 may enter into an agreement or arrangement, if

(i) the establishment, maintenance, or operation of such institution is permitted
under any Act of Parliament or the rules or regulations made there under; and

(ii) it has made an application under sub-regulation (3) of regulation 8, after
following the procedure specified in these regulations

(b) the campus to be established under such agreement or arrangement shall be
* treated as an off-campus centre of the institution deemed to be University as long as

such agreement or arrangement remains valid under such law; and
® subject to similar standards of audit and disclosure as a not-for-profit entity as that of
the institution deemed to be University;

(c) the institution deemed to be University, which is eligible under regulation 8 may enter
into an agreement or arrangement for practical training of students of a skill-oriented
vocational courses, if such course is approved by the University Grants Commission or
any other body established under any Act of Parliament.

(d) twinning Programmes, Joint Degree Programmes, and Dual Degree Programmes shall
be offered in accordance with the provisions stipulated in the University Grants
Commission (Academic Collaboration between Indian and Foreign Higher Educational
Institutions to offer Twinning, Joint Degree, and Dual Degree Programmes) Regulations,
2022.

(e) the income and property of the institution deemed to be University shall be utilised
solely for promoting the objectives of the institution deemed to be University.

(f) the Commission shall have the power to issue directions to an institution deemed to be
University for implementation of any public policy of the Government or in respect of
any law in force, including appropriate directions in case of any violation of any law or
policy by the institution deemed to be University.

(g) no portion of the income and property of the institution deemed to be University shall
be paid or transferred directly or indirectly, by way of dividend, bonus, or otherwise
how so ever by way of profit to the persons who were at any time or are members of the
institution deemed to be University or to any of them or any persons claiming through
them:

PROVIDED that nothing herein contained shall prevent the payment in good faith of
remuneration to any member thereof or another person as consideration for any service
rendered to the institution deemed to be University or for traveling or other allowances

and such other charges.

22
--- Page 23 ---
(h) in consultation with the Commission, the Government shall have the power to impose
such other conditions, not inconsistent with these regulations, in the notification, and
the same shall be binding on the institution deemed to be University.

(i) where the institution deemed to be University wishes to surrender its status of

“Institution deemed to be University”, it shall do so with the prior permission of the
Government; and similarly, withdrawal of any constituent units or off-campus or off-
shore campus of the institution deemed to be University from the purview of an
institution deemed to be University, shall require the sponsoring body to take the prior
permission of the Government:
PROVIDED that such surrender or withdrawal, as the case may be, shall take effect only
after the last batch of students on the rolls of the institution deemed to be University or
its constituent units, as the case may be, have been accorded the opportunity to qualify
for the completion of the programme of study and award of degree.

(j) the institution deemed to be University shall furnish to the Central Government or the
Commission such returns or other information with respect to its property or activities
as the Central Government or the Commission may, from time to time, require, within
such period as may be specified by the Central Government or Commission.

(k) convocations of the institution deemed to be University for conferring the degrees or
for other purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules of the
institution deemed to be University.

(I) the Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-

thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw a degree of academic distinction
conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the institution
deemed to be University for good and sufficient cause:
PROVIDED that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been
given to that person calling upon him or her to show cause within such time as may be
specified in the notice as to why such a resolution shall not be passed and until his or
her objections, if any, and any evidence he or she may produce in support of them, have
been considered by the Executive Council.

(m) in the event of conflict of opinion with regard to the interpretation of these regulations,
the opinion of the Commission shall be final.

(n) the provisions contained in the University Grants Commission (Institutions deemed to
be Universities) Regulations, 2023 shall prevail in case of any inconsistency or
conflicting provisions in any other regulations issued by the Commission under the
provisions of the Act.

32. Legal proceedings
32.1. The Registrar may sue or be sued for the purpose of any legal proceedings against
institution deemed to be University, who shall have the power to enter into agreements,
sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the institution deemed to be
University, and have the powers to exercise such powers and perform such duties under

the provisions of these regulations.

23
--- Page 24 ---
32.2. No suit or legal proceedings shall lie against the Government or the Commission in respect
of anything done or purported or intended to be done in pursuance of any of these
regulations.

32.3, In the event of non-compliance of any of the provisions as enumerated herein above or
any other provisions as stipulated in the University Grants Commission (Institutions
deemed to be Universities) Regulations, 2023, the Institution shall be liable to be
subjected to one or more of the following actions, namely:

(a) for violation of these regulations established by the enquiry committee set up by the
Commission or Government, the institution deemed to be University shall be warned
in writing with public notice or barred from any expansion in terms of diversification
to new courses or programmes of study or departments and establishment of off-
campuses or off-shore campuses, for a period of three years or as recommended by the
enquiry committee, whichever is higher;

(b) continuous violation of regulations established by the enquiry committee set up by the
Commission or the Government may result in closure of the courses or programmes of
study or Departments and off campuses or constituent institutions or off-shore
campuses or may result in withdrawal of the status of institution deemed to be
University;

(c) in order to protect the interests of students in case of surrender or withdrawal of the
status, as the case may be, shall take effect only after the last batch of students on the
rolls -of the institution deemed to be University or its constituent units, has been
accorded opportunity to qualify for the completion of the programme of study and
award of degree.

33. Removal of Difficulty
UGC reserves the right to remove difficulty (ies) in the course of implementation of this MoA in

consultation with the Government of India, Ministry of Education.

Pca aaacds

Signed sealed and delivered by
Dr. Madan A Sendhil

Authorized Signatory

K. Palaniappa Memorial Educational Trust

24